Purpose and Scope

1
1
1
2
2
2
5
5
5

The purpose of an academic department or school is to support the mission of the University by
offering academic programs or courses in the disciplines it houses, promoting academic inquiry
and critical thinking within and across disciplines, and engaging in disciplinary and interdisciplinary
research, scholarship, community service, and creative activities. This policy provides criteria and
guidelines for the establishment of a new department, designation of a unit as a school, and
changing the name of a department or school without changing its structure or designation.
Definitions
1. For the purpose of this policy, the terms "director" and "directors" shall refer specifically
to the administrative head of a "school." The terms do not apply to other "directors" of
programs housed within departments/schools (e.g., graduate programs, credential
programs, etc.)

1

Policy Statement
1. To qualify as an academic department or school, the proposed entity must:
a. Intend to offer a set of academic courses, approved through the appropriate FAM
designated curricular process.
b. Ensure to its faculty, the rights and responsibilities of Academic Freedom, as
outlined by FAM 355.6 (Statement Concerning Professional Ethics and
Responsibilities)
c. Provide a plan for a sufficient number of tenure-line faculty, with the assistance of
associated departments when necessary, to provide appropriate curriculum and to
engage meaningfully in shared governance activities.

2. Criteria for the designation of a unit as a school may vary by discipline but should address
issues such as:
a. Professional accreditation or licensing/certification requirements for graduates
b. Established (or emerging) practice for disciplinary terminology in higher education
c. Reorganization of logical subunits within a college, if needed
d. Enhanced potential for procuring grants, contracts or other significant program
funding/resources (e.g. endowments, scholarships, sponsorships).
e. Improvements in services to students, faculty, staff, and
community.
f. How such a designation can contribute to the recruitment
and retention of a high-quality faculty

3. If a department or school wishes to change its name without making structural or
designation changes, it must comply only with item II. Department/School Name Change.
Procedure and Process
Procedures for the Establishment of a New Academic Department or School
1. Initiation of Proposal
a. Faculty members, departments, or administrative officers of the University may
initiate a proposal for a new academic department or school within a college.
Ideally, initiators should collaborate with stakeholders (including related
departments, community members, administrators, etc.) as part of the proposal
process.
b. The initial request should be submitted in writing to the appropriate college
dean(s), who will consult with the Provost or designee, and other
administrators as needed.

2. New Department or School Proposal: The proposal should be organized as follows:
2

a. The exact name of the proposed academic program and name(s) of the
individual(s) preparing the proposal;
b. A list of stakeholders and their statements of support (or other comments).
c. In the case of a "school" (not department) proposal, the criteria that provide the
rationale and justification for creating the school (see: purpose and scope).
d. The proposed date of implementation and the appropriate timeline for the
process of implementation;
e. The number of faculty projected in the new department or school's first year of
operation including names of existing faculty, and a statement of how the
proposal might assist with the recruitment and retention of diverse, quality
faculty, including the names of existing faculty who would be moved from other
department(s) and/or school(s).
f. The courses, curricula, programs, degrees to be administered by the new
department or school;
g. Estimation of effects that this change would have on other department(s) or
school(s). If the new department or school is breaking away from existing
academic programs and/or departments, said entities need to be involved in
meaningful consultation.
h. Results of a vote from each department or school directly affected, as well as
written comments from affected academic program chair(s)/director(s) and
faculty should be solicited and appended. Anonymity should be respected
throughout the process including secret ballots and written comments. Voting
should be implemented by the College Elections Officer according to Faculty
Senate elections processes.
i. Any new resources and support needed during each of the first three years of
operation and plan for long-term support. If known, also include a possible
source(s) of funding and a detailed budget of the new department or school.
j. A clear rationale for how the proposed department or school will advance the
objectives of the University and College's missions and strategic plans.

3. New Department/School Proposal: Procedure for Approval
a. The complete initial proposal must be submitted to the appropriate college
dean(s) for consultation and signature(s). The college dean(s) shall provide
written comments/ recommendations to the originator(s) of the proposal.
b. After a consultation, the proposal may be revised and resubmitted to the
college dean(s) for further review.
c. The revised proposal along with comments and recommendations from the
college dean(s) will then be forwarded to the Executive Committee (EC) of the
Faculty Senate, which will seek recommendations from the Educational Policy and
3

Resources Committee (EPRC) and, if necessary, recommendations from other
appropriate senate committee
d. The recommendations and comments from the consulting committees will be
submitted to the EC of the Faculty Senate.
e. The EC of Faculty Senate will include the proposal on the Faculty Senate agenda as
a two-reading item.
f. Upon review by the Faculty Senate, the proposal and all comments and
recommendations will be forwarded to the VP of Academic Affairs, who will, in
turn, submit comments and recommendations to the President of the University.
g. If the President does not approve the proposal, s/he will return the proposal to
the EC of Faculty Senate with rationale for disapproval, comments, and
recommendations. The EC of Faculty Senate will share this information with the
originators of the proposal.
h. If at any point in the process, where the proposal is not approved, and the
originators wish to pursue the process, they will need to re-submit the proposal
starting from the beginning.
4. Timeline; Timeline reflects an academic year.
5. All efforts should be made to avoid unnecessary delays for each step of the review
process. A recommended timeline from submission to final approval or disapproval is:
a. Dean first review: 3 weeks
b. Revisions (if needed): 2 weeks
c. Dean second review (f there were revisions): 2 weeks
d. EPRC: 3 weeks
e. Faculty Senate Executive Committee: 3 weeks
f. Faculty Senate: 4 weeks (depending on Faculty Senate schedule)
g. Provost and VPAA: 2 weeks
h. President: 6 weeks
6. Solicitation of External Funding
a. The new department or school must be approved prior to any formal solicitation
of funds or formal gift agreement.

7. New Degree Programs within New Department/School
a. If there is a new degree program associated with the newly formed
department/school, the proposers shall follow all guidelines provided by current
Academic Policies at the State and Campus-level for curriculum development.

Department/School Name Change
1. Proposals for changing the name of the department or school must be initiated by the
faculty member(s) within that department or school. A majority vote of the faculty in the
4

academic department or school is required to move the proposal forward. If the majority
is met, appropriate curricular procedures should be followed to update the University
Bulletin.