Purpose and Scope
1

Ancillary Units (such as Institutes and Centers) have become the principal instruments by which
a university community can organize particular areas of research, curricular programs, and
service to the community which transcend the boundaries of traditional academic departments
or disciplines. They are characterized by their flexible goals and structure, specific functions,
and are multidisciplinary in nature. Ancillary Units can provide a valuable link among separate
but related academic disciplines and between the academic expertise of the University and the
needs of the surrounding community. All Ancillary Units must contribute to the academic and
strategic mission of California State University San Bernardino (CSUSB). The academic mission
of the University includes instruction, research, and service, including community partnership
and other such enterprises.
Definitions
1. Ancillary Unit: For the purpose of this policy, the term "Ancillary Units" shall be
taken to include centers, institutes, bureaus, laboratories, research groups,
councils, consortia, or similar entities that support the academic missions of the
University. It does not apply to other types of entities that may have similar titles
(e.g., the Student Health Center, the Learning Center) but that either support the
nonacademic functions of the University or are housed and funded by the

University administration. This policy applies to all Ancillary Units currently
established as well as those that may be developed in the future.
2. Functions of Ancillary Units may include, but are not limited to:
a. conducting opinion polls and focus groups
b. conducting basic research
c. data gathering
d. developing policy studies and analyses
e. disseminating research findings
f. forming a group for submission of grants proposal{s) for support of professional
activities
g. providing a link between the University and outside organizations
h. sponsoring conferences
i. sponsoring, coordinating, and promoting the research of faculty and students from
several departments or colleges.
j. submitting grant/contract proposals, and conducting funded sponsored programs
activity.

3. Ancillary Units shall not offer courses for University credit; however, courses may
be offered in conjunction with a department or college.
4. All Ancillary Units must be reviewed by the Faculty Senate and Provost/Vice
President of Academic Affairs {VPAA) or designee, and be approved by the
President. Once approved, these units have the right to seek outside funding as
university entities.
5. Ancillary Units Status: Ancillary Units are to be classified internally based upon
the stage of development and/or adherence to reporting requirements set forth
in this policy.
a. Developmental Status: An Ancillary Unit with "developmental" status is a
new unit which will be reviewed at the end of the third year of operation.
This "developmental" status label is to be used only for CSUSB internal
purposes, and under most circumstances should not be used in
applications for external funding. After a successful third-year review, the
Ancillary Unit will be granted "active" status. The Ancillary Unit may
formally request another cycle of developmental status if it requires
additional time. An Ancillary Unit with "developmental" status submits an
annual report to the Unit's reporting person {see section 6) and to the
Faculty Senate.
b. Active Status: An Ancillary Unit with "active" status has undergone a
successful review at the end of its third year and submits an annual report
to the Unit's reporting person and to Faculty Senate. Once granted
"active" status, the Ancillary Unit may be asked to undergo further review
if deemed necessary by the Unit's Reporting Person or by the
Provost/VPAA.

2

c. Probationary Status: An Ancillary Unit that fails to submit an annual
report to the reporting person (see below) or that fails to provide written
responses to the CCl's recommendations within 30 days will be considered
to be on "probationary" status. The reporting person or CCI shall notify
the Unit, the designee of the Provost/VPAA, and the Faculty Senate Office,
and the Unit will be given 60 days after notification to submit an annual
report or its written responses to the CCl's recommendations. Failure to
submit the annual report within this time will lead to placement of the
Ancillary Unit on "inactive" status.
d. Inactive Status: An "inactive" Unit may not seek funding or function as an
Ancillary Unit until it has undergone a successful review and has been
reinstated by the Provost/VPAA. To regain "active" status, the Unit must
submit required documents (see section 17) and a written request for
reinstatement to the Unit's reporting person, who will forward the
documents along with his/her comments to the Faculty Senate and
Provost/VPAA. The CCI will review the request and forward its
recommendation for reinstatement to the Faculty Senate Executive
Committee, which will provide its recommendation to the Unit's reporting
person and the Provost/VPAA.
e. Termination: An Ancillary unit may be terminated if it remains on
"inactive" status for 12 months or for other compelling reasons, as
determined by the Faculty Senate and the Provost/VPAA.

6. Reporting Person: The "reporting person" is the head of the academic unit or
administrative division of the University (e.g., department, college, Office of
Graduate Studies, Office of Academic Affairs) who has programmatic oversight of
the Ancillary Unit.
7. Director: The "Director" shall be the person or persons who are responsible and
accountable for the activities of the Unit. The "Director" may be a single director,
multiple co-directors, an executive director, or a committee with at least one
person who is identified as "responsible" for the governance of the Ancillary Unit.
8. Annual Report: The "annual report" is the report that the Ancillary Unit shall
make each year to the reporting person. The annual report will include
information regarding the Ancillary Unit's goals and accomplishments, the
participation of students and faculty in the Unit's activities, the Unit's governance
and reporting structure, the amount of external funds raised, units of assigned
time, and the use of the University's internal resources.
9. Committee for Centers and Institutes (CCI): The CCI shall be established as a
special committee of the Faculty Senate that is composed of one tenure-track
faculty member from each college, one student representative, and two current
directors of centers or institutes. The committee shall also include as an ex
officio, non-voting member the Associate Provost for Academic Research. The CCI

3

is responsible for conducting administration and oversight of the procedures
established in this policy, including:
a. review proposals for the creation of centers and institutes and refer the proposals to
the Executive Committee of the Faculty Senate for action;
b. review annual reports and conduct periodic reviews for centers and institutes and
make recommendations on their status to the Faculty Senate, Provost, and President
c. complete annual updates on the center and institute automated system, including
inputting current contact information for Cl directors and reporting persons;
d. conduct administration and oversight of the completion, submission, tracking, and
storage of center and institute proposals, annual reports, and the procedures for
periodic review;
e. coordinate support and, where appropriate, foster collaboration among centers and
institutes across campus;
f. provide the Executive Committee of the Faculty Senate a report, prepared by the CCI
committee chair, at the end of each semester that includes the status of all Cl annual
reports and a summary of other committee activities related to the duties described
above.

Policy Statement
10. Every Ancillary Unit must be under the programmatic oversight of an academic unit or
administrative division of the University (e.g. department, college, Office of Graduate
Studies, or Office of Academic Affairs} pursuant to Executive Order No. 751, which is
available at http://www.calstate.edu/EO/E0-751.pdf.
11. The Ancillary Unit may choose the leadership structure which best suits the mission of
the Unit, as long as it clearly delineates who is responsible and accountable for activities
of the Unit. The responsible person-referred to as the "Director"-should be the most
qualified person/people for the role, where "qualified person" is operationally defined
to mean a person, who has the technical and managerial expertise to assume the role,
as well as the capacity to operate in an academic environment. Under most
circumstances, the Director should be a tenure-track faculty member.
12. Ancillary Units with "developmental" status should consider including an Advisory Board
composed of tenure-track faculty, the Director and where useful, an appropriate
number of community members. Ancillary Units without a faculty director must have an
advisory board with at least two faculty representatives appointed by the Executive
Committee of the Faculty Senate. The members of the Advisory Board shall be approved
by the Unit's reporting person, (e.g. College Dean, Provost/VPAA}. Existing Active
Ancillary Units may also wish to include an Advisory Board.

4

13. While it is expected that most Ancillary Units will eventually generate enough external
funding to become self-sufficient, the University may provide some initial support in the
form of assigned time, office space, equipment, staff support, etc.
14. Once an Ancillary Unit is approved as "developmental" or "active" status, the Unit may
seek funding from outside entities. All formal agreements or contracts must be signed
by the Executive Director of the University Enterprise Corporation for CSU SB (UEC} or
his/her designee, or the President or his/her designee. See the Policy for the
Administration of Grants and Contracts in Support of Sponsored Program, which is
available at http://policies.csusb.edu/grants_and contracts.htm.
15. All Active Ancillary Units shall be listed in the Campus Directory along with the name(s)
and phone number(s) of the Director, staff, and the address of the office where the
Ancillary Unit is primarily housed.
16. Normally, Ancillary Unit programs and activities fall under campus ownership, including
component activities and program funds, and therefore must follow campus policies
and procedures. In case of externally funded grant and contract activity, policies and
procedures negotiated by the UEC/Sponsored Programs and the external funding
agency must be followed.

Procedure and Process
APPROVAL PROCESS FOR INSTITUTES:
17. Proposals for the formation of an Ancillary Unit shall employ the following procedures:
a. A clear statement and delineation of the purpose of the proposed Ancillary Unit. The
statement shall include a description of how the activities of the Unit are intended
to contribute to the accomplishment of the stated purpose and to the academic and
strategic mission of the University.
b. A clear statement of how the Ancillary Unit will be housed within an academic or
administrative division of the University (e.g. department, college, Office of
Graduate Studies, or Office of Academic Affairs) and description of:
i. the proposed organizational and governance structure (including an
organizational chart and signature of all individuals involved in the
Ancillary Unit); and
ii. a clear statement of who is responsible for reporting the Unit's activities
(e.g. Provost/VPAA or designee, Associate Provost of Research, College
Dean, etc.).

5

c. A statement of any anticipated relationships with public or private agencies or
organizations.
d. A description of the membership, roles, and responsibilities of the Advisory Board.
Any potential conflicts of interest should be identified.
e. Consultation with any affected departments, colleges, etc, shall be conducted.
Comments/feedback, recommendations, and signatures shall be provided by the
chairs and deans of these affected entities.
f. A statement of goals and objectives of the Unit including approximate time frames
for different activities noted. These goals and objectives should be used as the
guidelines for the annual assessment of the Ancillary Unit.
g. Where applicable, a statement of how the unit will conform to accepted standards
of academic research, including peer review, human subject research, animal
research, etc.
h. A statement of all possible sources of anticipated funding (internal and external).
i. A projected budget for the first three years of operation with revenues and
expenditures, including funding requirements from University sources (Note:
Approval of the Ancillary Unit does not mean that the Unit will receive funding from
the University). The budget report should follow the format established by the CCI
(Appendix A).
18. A proposal for an Ancillary Unit shall be submitted to the Faculty Senate Executive
Committee, which will refer it to the CCI and other appropriate committees (e.g., the
General Education Committee, the University Curriculum Committee, the Faculty Affairs
Committee, or other committees of the Faculty Senate) for review. These committees
shall forward their comments and recommendations, including any concerns and
suggested changes for the original proposal, to the Executive Committee of the Faculty
Senate. The proposal along with the recommendations from the CCI and any other
committee(s) that reviewed the proposal shall be placed on the Faculty Senate agenda
as an action item. Additionally, prior to the Faculty Senate meeting, the Executive
Committee of the Faculty Senate shall send an email announcing its agenda containing
the name of the Ancillary Unit. Comments or concerns regarding the proposed Ancillary
Unit may be made to a senator prior to the Faculty Senate meeting for which this
Ancillary Unit's approval is an information item. Full copies of the original proposals will
be made available in the Faculty Senate Office.
19. The Provost/VPAA (or designee) will make recommendation(s) to the President
regarding approval of the proposal. If the proposal is approved and signed by the
President, copies of the final proposal will be filed in the Unit's reporting person, Office
of the Provost/VPAA, and in the Faculty Senate Office. The newly approved Ancillary
Unit shall have "developmental" status and be subject to review at the end of its third

6

full academic year of operation (see section 5). The Office of the Provost/VPAA will
maintain a list of Ancillary Units, including contact information for Director(s) of the
Unit.
20. If the President does not approve the Ancillary Unit proposal, his/her written comments
and recommendations will be submitted to the Executive Committee of the Faculty
Senate and a copy will be sent by the Office of the Faculty Senate to the originator(s) of
the proposal. The President's written comments and recommendations will also be
included on the Faculty Senate agenda as an information item.
21. Upon approval, the Ancillary Unit may seek funding from the University and from
external sources. The approval of the Ancillary Unit does not mean that the requested
university resources will be provided. The decision for university resources will be made
by the President or Provost/VPAA or designee.
ANNUAL REPORTS:
22. By October 1st of each year, the CCI will initiate the procedures for the submission of
annual reports and the completion of periodic reviews. The CCI will send fillable
electronic forms (using Adobe Sign or another electronic platform) to the Units'
directors which will be used for the submission of annual reports. The CCI is responsible
for updating its record of Units' directors and contact information prior to initiating the
procedures. The CCI shall forward its updated record of contact information for centers
and institutes to the Associate Provost for Academic Research who is responsible for
submitting it to the Chancellor's Office.
23. By October 30th of each year, each Ancillary Unit will submit an annual report of
activities for the previous academic year using the electronic form sent by the CCI. The
CCI is responsible for routing each annual report to the Unit's reporting person and
Provost/VPAA. The Unit's reporting person will submit their recommendations by
December 15 using the electronic form. The Unit's reporting person will include with
their recommendation the method used for the review (e.g., what elements were
evaluated, including budget and accomplishments; and what discussions were held).
The CCI is responsible for routing the reporting person's recommendations to the Units'
directors.
24. The Ancillary Unit may submit attachments with their annual report where applicable.
ANCILLARY UNIT REVIEW PROCESS:
25. The CCI will review each Ancillary Unit once every five years. If at the conclusion of the
review there are one or more unsatisfactory outcomes, the next review may be

7

scheduled in fewer than five years. In addition, the Unit's reporting person, the
Provost/VPAA, or the Executive Committee of the Faculty Senate may initiate the review
process for an Ancillary Unit.
26. For the CCl's periodic review of the Ancillary Unit, the CCI shall obtain from the Faculty
Senate office an original or revised proposal for the Ancillary Unit. The CCI shall also
obtain copies of the annual reports since the last review of the Ancillary Unit, which the
CCI is responsible for storing on a University approved cloud (Microsoft Sharepoint or
another online cloud service);
For the Ancillary Unit's periodic review, the Unit's Director(s) will provide a short cover memo
that explains the contents and highlights of these annual reports
27. The CCI will review the material provided by the Ancillary Units, recommend a status for
them (from section 5 above), and indicate problems if they exist. The CCI will evaluate
the Unit using the following criteria:
a. the success of the Ancillary Unit in meeting the goals and objectives outlined in the
original approved proposal;
b. the effective use of all internal University support;
c. the success of obtaining external support and the use of that support;
28. The report of the CCI shall be submitted, as completed, to the Provost, Unit Reporting
Person, relevant College Dean, Director(s), Sponsored Programs, Executive Committee,
and President by March 30th. The report will include the evaluation criteria and
methods used to review the Unit. Within 30 days of receiving the CCl's report, Ancillary
Units may respond in writing to any recommendations made by the CCI. The Unit's
written response shall be attached to the Unit's annual report, included in the formal
record of the review, and forwarded to the Provost/VPAA.
29. The Senate shall receive the reports as information items. The Provost/VPAA (or
designee) shall review the report and make recommendations on the status of the
Ancillary Unit as "continuing developmental (to be reviewed in 3 years)," "active,"
"inactive," "probationary," or "termination." The report and recommendation(s) will be
forwarded to the President by May 15th, who shall make the final decision.
30. Upon discontinuance or termination of an Ancillary Unit, all residual funds and property
become custody of the academic unit or administrative division of the Reporting Person
and shall be used for similar programs/activities that advance the mission of the
campus.