A. Faculty Position Funding Process
1. Faculty Serialized Positions
(a) All currently filled faculty positions will be transferred to each college by
the end of the 1997/98 fiscal year.
(b) Unfilled positions will be transferred to colleges, effective July 1, 1998
based on the 1997/98 faculty line allocations. Unfilled positions will be
serialized and funded at the Assistant Professor Step 1 level, using the
1998 faculty salary schedule. Corresponding benefits will be
maintained centrally by Academic Affairs since these new faculty lines
are going to be funded by converting current part-time faculty funds to
serialized faculty positions. Whenever colleges fill a vacant serialized
position, Academic Affairs will fund the 30% benefit cost.
2. New Tenure-Track Faculty Appointments
(a) Starting with the 1998/99 Academic Year, each college will be
responsible for budgeting and assigning a serial position to newly hired
(tenure track 2360 class code or full-time lecturer 2358 class code)
faculty.
(b) Colleges will also have the responsibility for converting all vacant
faculty serial positions used to support part-time faculty personnel to
the 911 part-time faculty blanket for the Academic Year. A position
transfer form will need to be sent to the Budget Office so that funds can
be transferred to the part-time faculty blanket.
3. New Temporary Full-Time Appointments
Colleges will budget and monitor all new temporary full-time faculty appointments. Such
appointments may be made by filling an existing serialized position.
4. Part-Time Faculty Appointments
2
Colleges will budget and monitor all temporary part-time faculty appointments using
funds from a serialized position..
(a) Conversion of Serialized Positions Colleges, after careful consideration,
may convert a vacant faculty serial position to support other needs in the
College. This may be done on a one-time basis or on a permanent basis. If
a faculty serial position is converted on a permanent basis, the college will
still need to meet their FTES within their allocated faculty lines. All
permanent conversions from faculty positions will have to have the approval
of the Vice President for Academic Affairs/Provost.
5. Faculty Leaves
(a) Leave-without-Pay (LWOP)
Colleges will receive full funding at the faculty member's rank and step for
the length of time the faculty member is on LWOP.
(b) Difference -in-Pay Leave (DIP)
Colleges will receive the equivalent salary of an Instructor step 1. The
faculty member receives the difference between an Instructor step 1 and
their current rank and step.
(c) Sabbatical
(1) Faculty on one term of sabbatical leave receive their full pay and
benefits.
(2) Faculty on two quarters leave receive 3/4 of their pay; colleges
receive 1/4 of the faculty member's rank and step.
(3) Faculty on sabbatical for the academic year receive 50% of their
pay; colleges receive the other 50% of the faculty member's salary
at the faculty member's rank and step.
Because sabbatical leaves are not funded by the Chancellor's Office or Academic
Affairs, each college should consider establishing a separate fund to wholly or partially
support sabbatical leave.
B. Staff Position Funding Process
1. Staff Serialized Positions
(a) Staff serialized positions will be transferred to the college/unit during the
1997-98 spring quarter. These positions are permanent positions allocated
to each college/unit and are part of the staff personnel baseline. The
college/unit will receive unused funds remaining in all vacant positions
3
during the 1997-98 fiscal year. Funds returned to the college/unit can be
transferred to any line item including supplies and services or equipment.
(b) During the 1998-99 fiscal year and thereafter, if a staff serialized
position becomes vacant the college unit has the flexibility to do the
following:
(1) The position can be recruited at the same classification and at the
position's funded salary or
(2) The position can be changed to another classification (with Human
Resources' review of the job description) to support the goals of
the college/unit. If the reclassification requires additional funds the
college/unit will need to cover the difference from their operating
expense budget. The University will cover the benefits up to the
monetary level of the prior benefits. If additional benefits are
needed for the position the college/unit will have to cover the cost
or
(3) The position can be downgraded. Unused funds returned to the
college/unit or
(4) The position can be eliminated with the funds (including benefits)
returned to the college/unit.
2. New Serialized Staff Positions
New staff positions requested by the college/unit will require the review of Human
Resources for the appropriate classification. The college/unit will cover the cost of the
position including benefits.
C. Reappropriation of Prior Year Balances
For the 1997-98 fiscal year all unspent funds can be carried over to the next fiscal year.
However, every effort should be made to use allocated funds (especially baseline funds)
during the year they were allocated. Requests for funds to be carried over including
one-time funds should be sent to Academic Affairs as one request under a 4599 end of
year (EOY) carryover subcode. Academic Affairs will combine all requests and will
submit one request to the University. Funds requested to be carried over will be
allocated to the college/unit during the first quarter of the next fiscal year. However, if
the college/unit has an unanticipated deficit at the end of the fiscal year, the funds to
cover the deficit will be deducted from the carry over funds before the funds are
transferred. If the college/unit reflects a deficit at the end of the fiscal year and there are
no carry over funds, the amount of the deficit will be deducted from the following year's
budget before baseline allocations are transferred.
D. Transfer of Funds Between Budget Line Items
4
All funds can be transferred between line items in Academic Affairs with the exception
of the Educational Opportunity Program (EOP) and the Junior Faculty Support
Development fund.
