Purpose and Scope

FAM 355.6, 2020
Professional Ethics

The purpose of this policy is to maintain ethical standards and define the responsibilities and
accountability as faculty {Unit 3 employees of the University). Ethics in research and creative
activities are addressed in the Policy on Upholding Research Integrity and Responding to the

Allegations of Research Misconduct: https://www.csusb.edu/policies/administration-grants-and-contracts-
support-sponsored-programs-policy

Policy Statement
This policy defines and provides guidance for ethical and accountability for faculty as
colleagues, role models, and teachers, specifically:

l. Professors, guided by a deep conviction of the worth and dignity of the advancement of
knowledge, recognize the special responsibilities placed upon them. Their primary
responsibility to their subject is to seek and to state the truth as they see it. To this end
professors devote their energies to developing and improving their scholarly competence.
They accept the obligation to exercise critical self-discipline and judgment in using,
extending and transmitting knowledge.
They practice intellectual honesty. Although professors may follow subsidiary interests,
these interests must never seriously hamper or compromise their academic freedom or
inquiry.
2. As teachers, professors encourage the free pursuit of learning in their students. They hold
before them the best scholarly and ethical standards of their discipline. Professors
demonstrate respect for students as individuals and adhere to their proper roles as
intellectual guides and counselors. Professors make every reasonable effort to foster
honest academic conduct and to assure that their evaluations of students reflect each
student's true merit. They respect the confidential nature of the relationship between
professor and student. They avoid any exploitation, harassment, or discriminatory
treatment of students. They acknowledge significant academic or scholarly assistance from
them. They protect their academic freedom.
1

FAM 355.6, 2020
Professional Ethics

3. As colleagues, professors have obligations that derive from common membership in the
community of scholars. Professors do not discriminate against or harass colleagues. They
respect and defend the free inquiry of associates. In the exchange of criticism and ideas,
professors show due respect for the opinions of others. Professors acknowledge academic
debt and strive to be objective in their professional judgment of colleagues. Professors
accept their share of faculty responsibilities for the governance of their institution. As
members of an academic institution, professors seek above all to be effective teachers and
scholars. Although professors observe the stated regulations of the institution, provided the
regulations do not contravene academic freedom, they maintain their right to criticize and
seek revision. Professors give due regard to their paramount responsibilities within their
institution in determining the amount and character of work done outside it. When
considering the interruption or termination of their service, professors recognize the effect
of their decision upon the program of the institution and give due notice of their intentions.

4. As members of their community, professors have the rights and obligations of other
citizens. Professors measure the urgency of these obligations in the light of their
responsibilities to their subject, to their students, to their profession, and to their
institution. When they speak or act as private persons they avoid creating the impression of
speaking or acting for their college or university. As citizens engaged in a profession that
depends upon freedom for its health and integrity, professors have a particular obligation
to promote conditions of free inquiry and to further public understanding of academic
freedom.

5. In accounts of their own professional activities (FARs, AARs, applications for grants and
leaves and the like), faculty members are held to the same standards of honesty as they are
in their professional work itself.

6. Suspected violations of these standards should be called to the attention of the Associate
Provost for Faculty Affairs and Development, who is empowered to conduct an
investigation and take appropriate action. However, observed, suspected, or apparent
misconduct in research and creative activities shall be reported to the Associate Provost for
Research and is subject to the Policy on Upholding Research Integrity and Responding to the
Allegations of Research Misconduct.