Purpose and Scope
Pursuant to Article 20, Section 37 of the Collective Bargaining Agreement (CBA), the CSU
provides resources to each campus for assigned time for exceptional service to students based
on its number of full-time equivalent students. This policy sets forth guidelines for the process
of selecting recipients of this award.

1
1
2
5
5
6

This policy shall remain in effect if the relevant article about the Exceptional Service to Students
Award is retained in a future CBA.
Policy Statement
The Exceptional Service to Students Award (ESSA) is intended to support student mentoring,
advising, and outreach, especially if these activities support underserved, first-generation,
and/or underrepresented students; the development and implementation of high-impact
educational practices; curricular redesign intended to improve student access and success;
service to the department, college, university, or community that goes significantly beyond the
normal expectations of all faculty; assignment to courses where increases to enrollment have
demonstrably increased workload; and other extraordinary forms of service to students.
Priority shall be given to applications that demonstrate that the quality of the students'
educational experience could not have been maintained without an increase in the faculty
member's workload.

The California State University , Bakersfield • Channel Islands • Chico • Dominguez Hills • East Bay • Fresno • Fullerton • Humboldt • Long Beach • Los Angeles
Maritime Academy• Monterey Bay• Northrldge •Pomona. Sacramento. SAN BERNARDINO• San Diego• San Francisco• San Jose• San Luis Obispo, San Marcos• Sonoma• Stanislaus.

FAM 035.4; 2023
Exceptional Service
1. Faculty already receiving assigned time for the same general category of activity (e.g.
assigned time for excess enrollments, assigned time for committee service) shall not be
eligible for support from this pool for the same activities.
2. Each award shall consist of three units of assigned time and shall be awarded in the
spring for use in the following academic year.
3. Any unused funds shall rollover for use in the following academic year.
4. CSUSB shall expend all funds allocated to the campus under this program by the end of
the academic year. The Academic Affairs Office shall provide, by mid-August, the
accounting of expenditures in the previous academic year, including any funds carried
over from prior years, to the Faculty Senate Executive Committee and the Chancellor
Office.
5. Costs of the assigned time shall be calculated based on the minimum salary for an
assistant professor.
6. Awards from appeals shall not exceed one course of the annual pool and shall be funded
in the subsequent academic year.
7. While awards are typically to be given for activities actually conducted during the year
for which the award is granted, work of a similar nature in prior years may be noted in
the narrative and acknowledged as establishing a pattern of exceptional service.
Procedure and Process
1. Award Committee
a. Membership: 7 members. The Executive Committee of the Faculty Senate shall
appoint one representative from each academic college and one representative
among the SSPARs, librarians, and coaches to two-year staggered terms. The
Associated Students, Inc. shall appoint one student representative to a one-year
term. The committee should be composed by the middle of the fall semester.
b. Functions: to evaluate applications and to periodically review and, if needed, make
recommendations for changes in this policy to the Executive Committee (EC) of
Faculty Senate.

2

FAM 035.4; 2023
Exceptional Service

Timeline
Early fall semester Call for ESSA committee members for

next A Y awards

Second week of October Call for applications, Provost's office
notifies senate of how many awards are
available

Last week of January Application deadline, committee
convened by Faculty Senate chair
February Evaluation of applications by ESSA

Committee

Last week in February Decision deadline - awards determined
First week of March Awardees notified by Faculty Affairs

2. Eligibility for application
a. All unit 3 employees, including lecturers, are eligible to apply.
b. Previous recipients who have not filed the required post-award report are not
eligible to apply.
c. Faculty members already receiving assigned time for the same general category
of activity (e.g. assigned time for excess enrollments, assigned time for
committee service) shall not be eligible to apply.

3. Application packet
The application packet for the Exceptional Service to Students Award must include the
following.
a. A narrative with the proposed activity, not to exceed two double space pages with a
12-point font. The statement must include compelling evidence of the need and
ability to complete· the activity.
b. A letter of support from a CSUSB faculty, chair, administrator, or someone who can
justify the need of the proposed activity,
c. Signatures of department chair and college dean on the proposal indicating their
awareness of submission and that no course assigned time is being provided for the
same general activity.
d. Incomplete applications shall not be considered.

3

FAM 035.4; 2023
Exceptional Service
The complete application packet should be submitted as one PDF document, emailed to
the Faculty Senate Office by the deadline, which will be forwarded to the Award
Committee.
4. Committee evaluation
The committee shall view the application and select awardees based on the maximum
amount of funds available for that year. The list of awardees shall be submitted to the
Provost and the Vice President of Academic Affairs.
5. Communication of results
The Provost and the Vice President of Academic Affairs or a designee shall provide the
list of awardees to the EC of Faculty Senate, applicants, department chair, and dean of
the college. The Provost's office shall maintain the list of awardees for the previous five
years.
6. Appeals
a. Appeals Committee: The Appeals Committee shall be composed of three members
of the Faculty Affairs Committee (FAC) appointed by the EC of Faculty Senate.
b. Timeline and Notification of Decisions: Appeals shall be made, in writing, to the
Chair of Faculty Senate and shall be filed no later than ten (10) university working
days after the date upon which the applicant received the decision. The Chair of the
Faculty Senate will appoint the Appeals Committee within ten university working
days of receiving the first appeal. The Appeals Committee shall complete their
review in no more than two (2) weeks after receipt of the appeal.
The Appeals Committee shall send notification of its decision to the appellant, Chair
of Faculty Senate, and the Provost and the Vice President of Academic Affairs.
Decisions made by the Appeals Committee shall be final and binding and are not
subject to the grievance procedures in Article 10 of the CBA.
7. Post-award report
The recipients of this award are required to submit post-award reports to the award
committee via the Faculty Senate Office by the end of the semester following the
academic year in which the award is granted. The report shall provide evidence that the
proposed activities were completed and that the intended impact on the students was
achieved.
These reports will be forwarded to the Provost and the Vice President of Academic
Affairs or a designee.