Preamble: Each year, each CSU campus may submit the names of up to two candidates
for honorary degrees to the Board of Trustees, which makes the final decision on these
awards. Recommendations are to be submitted by the campus President after
consultation “with a committee, including faculty representation, to review
recommendations and to assist in the development and compilation of materials in support
of nominations to be forwarded.”
Procedures:
1. Each Spring term, the Executive Committee of the Faculty Senate shall constitute
an Honorary Degree Committee for the following academic year. This committee
will be comprised of:
A. The provost or designee.
B. Five faculty members, one from each college, selected by the Senate
Executive Committee.
C. A member of the library staff, selected by the Senate Executive Committee.
D. A representative of the University Advancement office, nominated by the
President.
2. Early in the Fall term, the Vice President for Academic Affairs/Provost shall invite all
members of the University community and the general public to submit names of
possible recipients of honorary degrees. A deadline of no later than November 1
should be set for these submissions.
3. The VPAA/Provost shall be responsible for assembling the Honorary Degree
Committee, and instructing the committee on its charge, as soon after the
submissions deadline as feasible. Taking into account the systemwide guidelines
for criteria, exclusions, and procedures, the committee shall consider the names
submitted and determine no more than two final nominees. In the process it may
consult with faculty members or others who are specifically familiar with the
accomplishments of certain candidates, or with the fields in which these candidates
have made their mark, as long as complete confidentiality is maintained.
The committee is responsible for compiling material to support the candidates it has
chosen. No later than December 1, the committee should forward its choices,
together with supporting material, to the President. The President may then decide
whether to forward both, one, or neither of the proposed recipients to the Board of
Trustees.