1. Purpose and Scope
 The purpose of these grants is to facilitate faculty in their research, scholarship, and
creative activity which will ultimately lead to their professional growth, and to the
enhancement of the student educational experience. Preference will be given to
probationary tenure-track faculty and to proposals not previously funded but which show
evidence of that initial preparation has already taken place. These grants are in the
following categories:
a. Mini-grants (up to $5,000)
 The specific purpose of mini-grants is to provide "seed monies" to support new
projects, or new phases of longer term projects that hold promise of extramural
funding. Faculty submitting a mini-grant proposal must indicate the place of their
project in their long-range research program. These grants may be used for support
such as re-assigned time, student assistants, clerical help, duplicating, computer time,
and supplies and services. In addition, mini-grants may be used to fund equipment
and/or travel specifically related to the project.
b. Summer Research Fellowships.
 Summer Research Fellowships are designed to provide faculty with financial
support to start, continue or complete a substantial project of creative activity,
scholarship or research, or an appropriate activity related to the faculty member's
academic discipline. The Fellowship will allow faculty members to apply for either a
stipend or research expenses (eg., supplies, travel, or student support). Examples of
such a project are completion of a manuscript, specialized course work or training, an
exhibition or a performance. Fellowship stipends will be will be fixed annually and may
be supplemented by the Faculty Professional Development Coordinating Committee
(FPDCC), the Associate Provost for Research, or the Provost.
c. Faculty Research Awards
Faculty Research Awards provide reassigned time to develop or complete a
substantial project of creative scholarship or research, or an appropriate activity
related to the faculty member's academic discipline such as completion of a
manuscript, specialized course work or training, an exhibition or a performance.
Last Revision 2014: FAC
1
FSD: 88-02.R8
FAM 036.5
Previous FAM 516
The department/school in which the faculty resides will receive funding of two-course
reassigned time at the internal rate. Faculty may take their Research Leave during any
academic year quarter, excluding summer sessions; the specific quarter will be decided
upon in consultation with the department chair/school director.
2. Funding
The term “college” shall be used to refer to an academic department/school or
equivalent unit for the purpose of this policy. The two equivalent units shall be (a)
counselors, i.e., SSP, ARs, and (b) librarians.
Total funds available for mini-grants are determined annually in accordance with
allocations from the Chancellor's Office. Chancellor's Office funding for Research,
Scholarship and Creative Activities is allocated to the three grant categories by the
Faculty Professional Development Coordinating Committee (FPDCC). The
available funds for mini-grants are assigned to the colleges based on the following
formula:








+ −
+ − = ×
FTEF in University untenured tenure track faculty in University
FTEF in College untenured tenure track faculty in College College Funds Total number of dollars ,
,
FTEF = Full-Time Equivalent Faculty, tenured and tenure-track
The Office of Academic Research will distribute the funds to faculty based on
the recommendations of the College Professional Awards Committees and
Deans in accordance with FPDCC allocation guidelines.
3. Eligibility
All tenure-track or tenured faculty members are eligible. Faculty who are in the Faculty
Early Retirement Program (FERP) are not eligible to receive these awards.
4. Application
4.1 Application and proposal description shall be made following the appropriate
standardized format which is available from the Office of Academic Research. Only
one completed application per grant category shall be submitted by an individual
faculty member or principal investigator by the indicated deadline. Furthermore,
applicants should avoid submitting the same proposal for funding in more than one
of the categories unless it is clearly indicated the project necessitates dividing it into
several parts. The request for multiple awards must be clearly justified. In the cases
Last Revision 2014: FAC
2
FSD: 88-02.R8
FAM 036.5
Previous FAM 516
of Faculty Research Awards or Summer Research Fellowships, only one individual
or principal investigator per project may apply.
4.2 Prior Grant Activity: The proposal must include a list of all grants, internal and
external, received in the last three years and proof of successful completion of
each of these grant activities.
4.3 Proposals must clearly show the significance of the project in terms of both the
professional development of the faculty member, and also the body of knowledge of
the faculty member's academic discipline, teaching fields, or areas of library
expertise.
5. Criteria for Evaluation
5.1 Proposals must clearly demonstrate quality in terms of the following:
a) Clarity: The proposal must clearly and concisely describe the project as
a whole using non-specialist language whenever possible.
b) Objectives: The proposal must describe the objectives of the
project and elaborate on the following: 1) the reasons for the
applicant undertaking the project; 2) the purpose of the particular
project; 3) if appropriate, the specific research questions or
hypotheses; and 4) the project's relation to the faculty member’s
present or future research or creative activity.
c) Methods: The proposal must clearly describe the activities, including
methods and procedures, which will be conducted and must clearly
show that these are designed to meet the stated objectives.
d) Feasibility: The proposal must present an organized plan of action
which demonstrates that the project is feasible. When appropriate, a
budget (see section 5.2) shall be included to demonstrate that the
project can be conducted in a manner that utilizes effectively the
resources requested.
e) Expected End Product: The proposal must elaborate on the expected
end product of the project. This can include publications (i.e. books,
monographs, articles or scholarly papers), creative activity (i.e.
gallery showings, concerts or theatrical productions), and external
grant proposals.
5.2 Proposals for Mini-Grants must clearly indicate that the budget requested
is necessary. Itemized expenditures are required, with a justification
Last Revision 2014: FAC
3
FSD: 88-02.R8
FAM 036.5
Previous FAM 516
included for each item.
6. Approval and Awards Process
6.1 Proposals for these grants shall be called for by the Office of Academic
Research in accordance with schedules established by this office.
6.2 The following special approvals may be required before submitting proposals:
6.2.1 Proposals requiring the use of human subjects for research purposes shall
be approved by the Institutional Review Board, should time permit, before
they are submitted. Those still requiring I.R.B. approval after the grants
evaluation shall not be finally released until after such review.
6.2.2 Proposals requiring the use of animal subjects for research purposes shall
be approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC)
before they are submitted.
6.2.3 Proposals requesting reassigned time must have the signatures of the
department chair/school director and college dean indicating that
consultation has occurred.
6.3 Members of College Professional Awards Committees may not submit an application
for a university award during the period of time they are serving on the committee.
6.4 All proposals received within the announced deadline schedule shall be distributed
to the appropriate College Professional Awards Committee. The committee shall
prepare a statement of merit for each proposal.
6.4.1 Each Professional Awards Committee for the academic colleges shall consist of
five faculty members from that college; no more than one per
department/school in colleges where there are five or more
departments/schools. If there are fewer than five departments/schools in that
college, at least one member should come from each department/school. The
Professional Awards Committees for the librarians and the counselors shall
have three members. Members of each College Professional Awards
Committee shall be bargaining-unit-three tenure-track faculty who will not apply
for any grants during their time of service, elected by the faculty of the college
under the supervision of the appropriate Constituent Unit Elections Officer.
Committee members shall be elected to two-year staggered terms.
6.4.2 Statements of merit shall be forwarded to the college office and to the
respective faculty members.
Last Revision 2014: FAC
4
FSD: 88-02.R8
FAM 036.5
Previous FAM 516
6.4.3 A faculty member may choose to respond to the statement of merit within
five working days. This response shall go to the college office.
6.5 The College Professional Awards Committee shall evaluate and rank all proposals
by category and shall make recommendations for allocations. In making
recommendations, the Committee, where appropriate, shall consider:
a. The quality (clarity, objective, method) and feasibility of the proposed project.
b. Evidence of preparation or preplanning for the proposed project.
c. Whether or not proposals fulfill the purposes for which the specified grant category
was designed.
d. The faculty member's prior record in the use of all grant awards in the past three
years.
e. The amounts and appropriateness of the budget request.
6.6 Recommendations from the College Professional Awards Committee shall be
forwarded to the Dean or University Librarian who may choose to make their own
individual recommendations. All recommendations shall be forwarded to the Office of
Academic Research, who will then make ranked recommendations to the Vice
President for Academic Affairs/Provost. The Vice President for Academic
Affairs/Provost will make the final decision.
6.7 After the process is completed, each applicant shall receive a copy of all material
relating to his or her proposal, including the statement of recommendation. A copy
shall also be retained in the office of the College Dean or University Librarian and in
the Office of Academic Research.
7. Report
A report describing use of the award and the completed project shall be submitted by
the award recipient to the Office of Academic Research by the deadline specified in the
“call for proposals.” The report should be an explicit narrative and shall contain
supporting evidence when possible. A file of such reports shall be maintained in the
Office of Academic Research. Failure to submit a timely final report will exclude faculty
members’ proposals for evaluation by the college Professional Awards Committee
during subsequent award cycles. Further, as stipulated in Faculty Professional
Development Program, such reports are required for review by an ad-hoc committee to
determine future awards programmatic needs and to assess the quality of projects
receiving awards.
Last Revision 2014: FAC
5
FSD: 88-02.R8
FAM 036.5
Previous FAM 516
8. Exception for College-Level Professional Development Resources and Support
The provisions contained herein do not apply to professional development resources
and support provided by a college to its faculty from sources other than those provided
by the Chancellor’s Office. Colleges will develop their own criteria and procedures for
awarding such college-level support and reporting such awards to college faculty