A faculty exchange may be arranged within the CSUC system, with another private or
public institution of higher learning. Faculty exchanges are primarily for faculty who have
been at an institution for an extended period of time and who would, therefore, most
benefit by the renewal which may be gained from an exchange agreement. Exchanges
are made for a period of one academic year.
The following criteria will be applied in evaluating requests for faculty exchange. Only
tenured faculty are eligible for faculty exchange, except in unusual circumstances. The
faculty member's Department Chairman and College Dean must approve the exchange
and certify that the absence of the faculty member will not curtail nor have a negative
effect on the academic program. There must be a tangible demonstration of prospects
for the professional growth of the faculty member or for other benefits for this institution.
In order that there not be too great a disruption to a department's academic program,
normally no more than 20% of the tenured faculty of any department may be on leave at
any one time.
The responsibility lies with the faculty member to initiate the exchange. Thus, a faculty
member bears the burden of finding the exchanging faculty member. A faculty member
should request approval for a proposed exchange in a written memo to his or her
Department Chairman and College Dean, in which the particulars of the exchange are
outlined. The exchanging faculty member coming to this campus must be acceptable to
the gaining department here. Faculty exchanges are normally made by two faculty
members in the same department or discipline. However, an exchange between faculty
or differing disciplines is permissible if appropriate arrangements are made and if no
staffing problems result. A faculty exchange should be arranged sufficiently early in the
academic year to ensure that appropriate curricular and scheduling arrangements can
be made.
Normal faculty appointment procedures, such as the development of a dossier and an
interview, are followed in all faculty exchanges. A written exchange agreement,
developed by the Office of Academic Affairs, will be signed by all faculty involved in the
exchange and by appropriate administrative officers of the institutions. Appropriate
Faculty Benefits, such as accrual of time toward sabbatical leave or an earned merit
salary increase will be specified in the exchange agreement. Arrangements for travel
expenses, if the exchange is within the CSUC system and if the distance between
campuses is greater than 100 miles, may be arranged through the Office of Academic
Affairs. Upon completion of the exchange, the faculty member shall file a report with the
Office of Academic Affairs detailing the experience gained during the exchange.