Section 1. Membership and Voting
A. The membership of the faculty shall be as follows but shall not include
Management Personnel Plan administrators with retreat rights either for purposes
of voting or for other faculty rights unless expressly permitted in the Constitution or
Bylaws:
Professor Librarian
Associate Professor   Associate Librarian
Assistant Professor   Senior Assistant Librarian

Qualified Lecturer*  

Assistant Librarian
Student Services Professionals-
Academic related

*Qualified lecturers include (a) those with a full-time annual or multi-year contract,
and (b) those with both a multi-year appointment and an annual time base greater
than or equal to 0.75. Time base eligibility in departmental elections shall be based
on annual entitlement in that department. Time base eligibility in college elections
shall be based on annual entitlement in that college. Time base eligibility in
university-wide elections shall be based on total annual entitlement. Eligibility shall
not change during the course of an academic year. Non-tenure-line Librarians and
Student Services Professionals - Academic Related are also deemed qualified if
their appointments meet these criteria.
B. Those named in subsection A shall have the power to vote in general faculty
meetings, in faculty referenda, and in elections for representatives to the Statewide
Academic Senate, to the Faculty Senate of the University, to standing committees
of the Faculty Senate, and to school and department committees; but with the
following exceptions:
1.     Only tenure-line faculty may vote for representatives to faculty recruitment
committees or to evaluation committees or any other panels so specified
by the Collective Bargaining Agreement.
2. Management Personnel Plan (MPP) faculty shall forfeit all Senate-
sanctioned voting rights as herein defined until such time as they return to
the tenure-line ranks.
3. Additional restrictions may be placed on voter eligibility in the Bylaws of
the Faculty Senate or in policy documents establishing special
committees.

C. Faculty on paid leave shall retain all powers to vote.
D. Faculty participating in the Faculty Early Retirement Program (FERP) shall retain
all powers to vote.
Section 2. Powers
A. The Faculty shall have the power to formulate, adopt, review and revise
recommendations relating to the policies and operation of the University, subject to
the laws of the State of California, the regulations of the Trustees of the California
State University, and the Collective Bargaining Agreement.
B. The Faculty shall normally exercise its powers through the Faculty Senate of the
University elected by, and representative of, the Faculty and subject to its review.

Last Revision 2021
C. Faculty or Faculty Senate approved policies shall become University policy after
adoption by the University President.
 Section 3. Officers
The officers of the Faculty shall be the President of the University or designee and the
Chair of the Faculty Senate or designee.
Section 4. General Faculty Meetings and Duties of Faculty Officers
A. The President or designee shall call at least one faculty meeting during the
academic year and may call special meetings whenever necessary. At these
meetings the President or designee shall preside.
B. The Chair of the Faculty Senate shall call a meeting of the Faculty whenever a
majority of the total membership of the Faculty Senate so requests. At such
meetings the Chair of the Faculty Senate shall preside.
C. The Chair of the Faculty Senate shall call a meeting of the Faculty whenever it is
requested by a petition of ten percent of the Faculty. At such meetings the Chair
of the Faculty Senate shall preside unless the Faculty elects to choose a chair pro
tem. The chair pro tem shall be elected by a majority of those present.  

ARTICLE II -- THE FACULTY SENATE
Section 1. Membership
Section 2. Powers
Section 3. Duties
Section 4. Officers
Section 5. Term of Service and Recall
Section 6. Agenda
Section 7. Meetings
Section 8. Duration of a Faculty Senate

Last Revision 2021
Section 1. Membership
The Faculty Senate shall consist of the members described below.
A. Faculty shall elect representatives from the following units:

1. The Jack H. Brown College of Business and Public Administration
2. College of Education
3. College of Arts and Letters
4. College of Natural Sciences
5. College of Social and Behavioral Sciences
6. Library
7. Student Services Professionals - Academic Related

One senate position shall be allocated to each of these units, and the number of
additional senate positions for each unit shall be determined by the following formula: the
number of faculty in that unit times 25 divided by the total number of faculty in all seven
units. The numbers used in the formula shall include only tenure-line faculty for each of
the five colleges and shall include both tenure-line faculty and qualified lecturers, as
defined in Article I, Section 1, Subsection A, for the Library and Student Services
Professionals - Academic Related. If the decimal part of the number resulting from this
formula is greater than or equal to 0.5, the number shall be raised to the next highest
integer, otherwise the decimal part shall be dropped.

The senators for each unit shall be elected by and from the faculty of that unit. For the
five colleges, only tenure-line faculty are eligible to vote for and serve in these positions.
For the librarians and student services professionals - academic related, both tenure-line
faculty and qualified lecturers, as defined in Article I, Section 1, Subsection A, are eligible
to vote for and serve in these positions.
This formula shall be implemented during the fall semester prior to electing Faculty
Senators in the Spring. The Faculty Senators so elected shall serve their entire terms
regardless of any change in number of faculty in any of the units during the course of the
academic year. If any unit is scheduled to gain or lose more than one senate seat in a
given academic year, it shall gain or lose only one seat per year until compliance with this
formula is achieved.
B. One lecturer representative from each of the five colleges shall be elected during
the regular Spring election cycle by and from qualified lecturers, as defined in
Article I Section 1, Subsection A, in that college.

Last Revision 2021
C. The constituencies specified in sections A and B shall each elect one alternate
per constituency using the procedures specified in the Bylaws. The alternate shall
have full voting rights in the absence of a duly elected senator. If a vacant senate
seat opens up, the alternate shall fill the remainder of the resigning senator’s term.
D. Ex-officio members shall consist of the following:
1. The President of the University, who shall not vote.
2. The Vice President for Academic Affairs/Provost, who shall not vote.
3. Delegates to the Academic Senate of the California State University, who
by election to that body become voting members of the Faculty Senate.
4. The Associated Students President, or designee approved by the AS
Executive Cabinet for the academic year, who shall be a voting member.
E. Only tenure-line Faculty may serve on the Statewide Academic Senate.
F. Management Personnel Plan Faculty may not serve as elected Faculty
representatives to the Statewide Academic Senate, to the Faculty Senate, or to
any committee at any level established under Senate policy.
Section 2. Powers
The Faculty Senate shall be the delegate assembly of the Faculty through which the
Faculty shall normally exercise its powers. All members of the Faculty have the right to
attend meetings of the Faculty Senate and may speak with the consent of the Chair of
the Faculty Senate, but they shall not vote. Other persons may attend at the discretion of
the Faculty Senate. The Faculty Senate, upon a majority vote of the voting members
present, may declare an executive session. Any action taken by the Faculty Senate is
subject to review by the Faculty and must be reviewed whenever the Faculty so requests
by a petition of fifteen percent of its members. The Faculty by vote of a majority of its total
membership may modify or nullify decisions of the Faculty Senate.
Section 3. Duties
A. The Faculty Senate shall perform all duties consistent with the formulation,
adoption, review and revision of recommendations relating to the policies and
operation of the University, within the limits prescribed by this Constitution.
B. The Faculty Senate shall create committees necessary to the performance of its
duties. Regulations and specific charges for these committees shall also be
established by the Faculty Senate.
C. The Faculty Senate, by vote of a majority of its total voting membership, shall
adopt all bylaws necessary to the performance of its duties and amend them when

Last Revision 2021
necessary. Changes in the bylaws shall not be proposed and voted upon at the
same meeting.
D. The Faculty Senate shall keep a record of its proceedings and shall distribute
copies of minutes to the Faculty and to the appropriate administrative officers of
the University.
E. The Faculty Senate shall establish appropriate procedures for implementation of
approved policies consistent with regulations of the Trustees of the California
State University.
Section 4. Officers
A. The officers of the Faculty Senate shall include a Chair, a Vice Chair, and an
Executive Secretary, all to be elected by and from the voting membership of the
Faculty Senate. They shall each serve for a one-year term.
B. A Faculty Senate officer may be removed from office by a vote of two-thirds of the
total voting membership of the Senate.
Section 5. Term of Service and Recall
A. Term of Service
Members shall serve for a term of two years (with the exception of the Statewide
Academic Senators who are elected for three-year terms, and lecturer
representatives who are elected for one-year terms), with terms so arranged that
one-half of the Faculty Senate shall be elected each year.
B. Recall
1. Any Faculty Senator, Statewide Academic Senator or Faculty Senate standing,
special, or ad hoc committee member shall be subjected to a recall election by
submission of a petition signed by 25 percent of their electorate. Alternatively, a
recall election may be initiated by the Elections Committee, after an investigation
requested by a majority vote of the Senate or of the affected Senate committee.
2. A member of the Faculty Senate, the Statewide Academic Senate or Faculty
Senate standing, special, or ad hoc committee is recalled by a two-thirds vote of
their electorate.
3. For recall purposes, the Faculty Senate shall serve as the &quot;electorate&quot; of Faculty
Senate special or ad hoc committee members elected by the Faculty Senate, and
the Executive Committee shall serve as the &quot;electorate&quot; of committee members
appointed by the Executive Committee.
Section 6. Agenda

Last Revision 2021
Any Faculty Senate committee or member of the Faculty may transmit to the Faculty
Senate Executive Committee topics for discussion and proposals for possible action
which are within the jurisdiction of the Faculty Senate at least ten working days before the
regularly scheduled meeting of the Faculty Senate. The established agenda shall be
circulated among the Faculty at least three days prior to the meeting of the Faculty
Senate.
All business left unfinished at the end of an academic year shall carry over to the next
academic year in the same procedural posture that it had at the end of the preceding
year.
Section 7. Meetings
The Executive Committee of the Faculty Senate shall call regularly scheduled meetings
of the Faculty Senate at least once a month during the academic year and special
meetings whenever necessary. A regularly scheduled meeting may be canceled for lack
of agenda.
Section 8. Duration of a Faculty Senate
Each Faculty Senate shall serve for one year. The currently seated Faculty Senate shall
serve until the last day of the current academic year. However, at the last two regularly
scheduled meetings of the academic year, the incoming Faculty Senate for the following
academic year shall be seated solely for the purpose of necessary elections. Officers, at-
large Executive Committee members, elections officers, and statewide Academic Senate
Alternates shall be elected at the next- to-last Senate meeting. If these elections are not
completed at the next-to-last Senate meeting, they may be elected at the last Senate
meeting. The chairs of the Educational Policy and Resources Committee and the Faculty
Affairs Committee shall be elected at the last Senate meeting.

ARTICLE III -- COMMITTEES OF THE FACULTY SENATE
Faculty Senate committees shall make recommendations to the Faculty Senate regarding
matters of policy, within the limits prescribed for them by the Faculty Senate and by this
Constitution and its Bylaws. All committees shall report regularly to the Faculty Senate
concerning committee activities.
Section 1. Standing Committees
Section 2. The Executive Committee
Section 3. The Elections Committee

Last Revision 2021
Section 4. Special and Ad Hoc Committees

Section 1. Standing Committees
A.   Standing Committees established in the Constitution shall be elected by the Faculty
Senate, with one person coming from each Constituent Unit. Representatives to other
standing committees shall be elected by Constituent Units, one representative per area
elected by the faculty of that area. Provisions may also be made for one or more
administrative representatives per committee and for one or more student
representatives per committee. The following shall be the Constituent Units for committee
representation:
1. The Jack H. Brown College of Business and Public Administration
2. College of Education
3. College of Arts and Letters and Library
4. College of Natural Sciences
5. College of Social and Behavioral Sciences, and Student Services Professionals –
Academic Related.
B. The Executive Committee and the Elections Committee shall be the sole standing
committees established in this Constitution. Other standing committees shall be
established in the Bylaws of this Constitution.
Section 2. The Executive Committee
A. Membership: The Executive Committee shall consist of the Chair, Vice Chair, and
Executive Secretary of the Faculty Senate, two other members of the Faculty
Senate who shall serve at-large, Statewide Senators, and the President or
designee. Neither the President nor designee shall be voting members. Each
elected member of the Executive Committee shall be from a different Constituent
Unit. The order for electing members of the Executive Committee shall be Chair,
Vice Chair, Executive Secretary, and Members At-Large. In addition, the Chair of
the Educational Policies and Resources Committee and the Chair of the Faculty
Affairs Committee shall be members of the Executive Committee. Elected
Executive Committee members, including the Chairs of the Faculty Affairs
Committee and the Educational Policy and Resources Committee, are elected by
and from the elected members of the Faculty Senate.
B. Duties:
1. The Executive Committee shall prepare the agenda for and schedule the meetings
of the Faculty Senate.

Last Revision 2021
2. The Executive Committee shall refer to relevant committees those issues that it
deems suitably significant from whatever source; however, the Executive
Committee may re-refer an item back to the committee only once after the first
assignment to said body. Following final receipt of referred or re-referred items
from relevant committees, the Executive Committee shall forward said items to the
Senate as a whole for consideration.
3. The Executive Committee shall interpret the meaning and intent of all articles of
the Constitution and Bylaws except as specified in Article II, Section 3, Part J of
the Bylaws.
4. The Executive Committee shall make appropriate nominations and appointments
to campus committees when necessary.
5. Other duties of the Executive Committee shall include, but are not limited to, acting
on behalf of the Faculty Senate when the Senate is not meeting regularly, such as
in the summer.
Section 3. The Elections Committee
A. Membership: The Vice Chair of the Faculty Senate shall serve as the Chair of the
Elections Committee and be the representative of their unit (College, Library, or
Student Services Professionals – Academic Related). The Faculty Senate shall
elect one representative from each remaining unit (College/Library/Student
Services Professionals – Academic Related).
B. Duties: The Elections Committee shall administer all provisions of Articles II and III
of the Bylaws.
Section 4. Special and Ad Hoc Committees
The Senate may establish Special and Ad Hoc Committees to serve special needs at the
University. These shall be established in Senate policy documents in conformance with
procedures established in the Bylaws. Faculty representation shall normally be by
Constituent Unit. There may also be at large faculty representatives and representatives
from other areas of the campus community. 

ARTICLE IV -- ADOPTION OF THIS CONSTITUTION
Approval by a majority vote of the Faculty, as defined in Article 1, Section 1, shall be
necessary for the adoption of this Constitution. 

ARTICLE V -- REVISION OF THIS CONSTITUTION

Last Revision 2021
An Ad Hoc Committee on constitutional revision shall be convened at least every five
years after the adoption of this Constitution to ensure that this Constitution is sufficient to
the needs of the University.
A. Membership: One representative from each constituent unit, elected by the Faculty
Senate and one member designated by the University President.
B. Duties: This committee shall initiate and review proposals for revision of the
Constitution and Bylaws of the Faculty Senate and make appropriate
recommendations to the Senate.

ARTICLE VI -- INITIATION OF AND APPROVAL OF
AMENDMENTS
Section 1. Initiation of a Referendum
Section 2. Approval of Amendments

Section 1. Initiation of a Referendum
A. The Faculty Senate, by majority vote, may initiate a referendum of the Faculty on
proposed amendments to the Constitution.
B. A referendum on amendments to this Constitution may also be initiated by a
petition of twenty percent of the Faculty.
Section 2. Approval of Amendments
Ratification of proposed amendments to this constitution shall require a two-thirds
affirmative vote of all valid ballots cast. The ratification election shall be conducted by the
Elections Committee. All members of the faculty, except faculty on full-time leave of
absence without pay, shall be eligible to vote. A copy of proposed amendments shall be
sent to every faculty member at least one week before ballots are distributed. A minimum
of ten working days shall be provided from the day that ballots are distributed to the
deadline for receiving ballots in the Senate Office.