I. Collegiality and Collective Bargaining
On September 13, 1978, Governor Edmund G. Brown, Jr., signed into law AB 1091,
The California Higher Education Employer-Employee Relations Act (HEERA).
(Education Code Section 3560, et. Seq.). This legislation provides faculty members of
the CSUC an opportunity to determine whether they wish to be represented by an
exclusive agent in negotiations on "wages, hours of employment, and other terms and
conditions of employment" (HEERA, Section 3561, r.). This section of the Education
Code also specifies the intent of the Legislature to preserve, under collective
bargaining, traditional shared governance mechanisms, including consultation, and the
principle of peer review in faculty personnel decisions. These intentions are expressed
in Section 3561 b. of the HEERA, which reads as follows:
The Legislature recognizes that joint decision-making and consultation between
administration and faculty or academic employees is the long-accepted manner of
governing institutions of higher learning and is essential to the performance of the
educational missions of such institutions, and declares that it is the purpose of this act
to both preserve and encourage that process. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed to restrict, limit or prohibit the full exercise of the functions of the faculty in
any shared governance mechanisms or practices including the Academic Senate of the
University of California and the divisions thereof, the Academic Senates of The
California State University and Colleges, and other faculty councils, with respect to
policies on academic and professional matters affecting The California State University
and Colleges, the University of California, or Hastings College of the Law. The principal
of peer review of appointment, promotion, and retention, and tenure for academic
employees shall be preserved.
This document has been prepared to describe the respective responsibilities of the
Academic Senate of the CSUC and of local Senates or Councils in this collective
bargaining context. The relationships, functions, and responsibilities proposed in this
document reflect consideration of HEERA, the Constitution of the Academic Senate of
The California State University and Colleges and tradition and practice in the CSUC.
II. The Traditional Role of the Academic Senate in the CSUC.
Last Revision 1984: Endorsed by the Senate Attachment to: AS-1217-81/EX 1
FSD: N/A
FAM 402
Previous FAM 025
2
The Trustees of the California State Colleges approved the Constitution of the
Academic Senate on March 8, 1963. Prior to this a majority of the voting faculty at each
of a majority of the college campuses had approved the document. Encouragement for
the establishment of the systemwide Academic Senate, as well for the creation of an
Academic Senate on each campus, came from the Chancellor, members of the Board
of Trustees and the California Legislature. The 1961 Legislature adopted Senate
Resolution No. 98 and Assembly Concurrent Resolution No. 78 requesting the Trustees
to establish an Academic Senate at each college "wherein the faculty members shall be
freely elected by their colleagues for the purpose of representing them in the formulation
of policy on academic and professional matters." Senate Resolution No. 20, which
resolved that the Trustees consider establishing an Academic Senate for the CSUC
system, was under discussion in the Senate Rules Committee when the Senate was
created in 1963.
An examination of the Constitution of the Academic Senate CSUC, as approved by the
Board of Trustees, reveals the official purposes of the Senate:
It shall be the purpose of the Academic Senate of The California State University and
Colleges to serve as the official voice of the faculties of The California State University
and Colleges in matters of systemwide concern; to consider matters concerning
systemwide policies and to make recommendations thereon; to endeavor to strengthen
the Senates and Councils of the several colleges; and to assume such responsibilities
and perform such functions as may be delegated to it by the Chancellor or the Trustees
of The California State University and Colleges.
Senate participation in academic, professional, and administrative matters during the 18
years of its existence evidences a tradition of shared governance in the CSUC and
suggests appropriate responsibilities for the Senate under HEERA. The collective
bargaining act makes explicit provision for the preservation of this tradition and
mandates continuing senate involvement in academic and professional matters. (See
HEERA, Section 3561 b., cited above.)
III. Academic Senate Participation in Systemwide Governance
The Academic Senate shall continue to serve as the official voice of the faculties in
systemwide academic and professional matters (the Constitution of the Academic
Senate CSUC, Article 1, Section 1 a.).
In respect to systemwide governance, the Academic Senate endorses the following
principle:
A. Criteria and standards to be used for the appointment, promotion,
evaluation, and tenure of academic employees shall be the joint
responsibility of the Academic Senate and the Board of Trustees of The
California State University and Colleges (HEERA, Section 3562 r.). (Criteria
Last Revision 1984: Endorsed by the Senate Attachment to: AS-1217-81/EX 2
FSD: N/A
FAM 402
Previous FAM 025
3
and standards determined jointly by the Academic Senate CSUC and the
Board of Trustees shall be considered minimal; campus senates/councils
may recommend additional criteria and standards.)
B. The Academic Senate of the California State University and Colleges shall
be consulted on the creation of systemwide and intersegmental committees,
conferences, or task forces designed to deal with educational, professional,
or academically-related fiscal matters, including the charge and composition
of such bodies. The Academic Senate shall be responsible for the selection
of faculty representatives to serve on or participate in such bodies.
C. The Academic Senate of The California State University and Colleges shall
be the formal policy-recommending body on general, systemwide policy
decisions related to the following matters:
1. minimum admission requirements for students;
2. minimum conditions for the award of certificates and degrees to
students;
3. curricula and research programs;
4.
minimum criteria and standards to be used for programs designed
to enhance and maintain professional competence, including the
awarding of academic leaves;
5. systemwide aspects of academic planning.
D. The Academic Senate of The California State University and Colleges shall be
consulted on the following:
1. systemwide aspects of program review;
2. systemwide aspects of the basic direction of academic support
programs;
3. systemwide policies governing the appointment and review of
presidents and academic administrators;
4. policies governing the appointment and review of systemwide
executive officers and academic administrators.
The Academic Senate of The California State University and Colleges shall not
participate in the process of collective bargaining. Normally, matters affecting wages,
hours of employment, and other terms and conditions of employment shall not be
considered by the Academic Senate. The Academic Senate shall endeavor to ensure
that educational and professional matters do not become subjects of bargaining.
IV. Campus Senate/Council Participation in Governance
Last Revision 1984: Endorsed by the Senate Attachment to: AS-1217-81/EX 3
FSD: N/A
FAM 402
Previous FAM 025
4
The Academic Senate of The California State University and Colleges shall have no
authority over those matters delegated to the individual campuses by the Chancellor or
by the Board of Trustees of The California State University and Colleges. Furthermore,
nothing in this document shall be construed to impair the right of academic senates and
councils of the several campuses to communicate through appropriate channels with
the Chancellor and the Board of Trustees, nor to diminish the authority of the campuses
and their senates in campus matters of academic/professional criteria and standards.
Because joint decision-making and consultation between administrators and faculty is
essential to the performance of the educational missions of The California State
University and Colleges, the academic senates/councils of the campuses shall be the
primary consultative bodies regarding educational and professional matters delegated
to the individual campuses by the Chancellor or by the Board of Trustees of The
California State University and Colleges and shall be consulted on fiscal matters which
affect the instructional program.
In respect to campus governance, the CSUC Academic Senate endorses the following
principles:
A. Responsibility shall be vested in the faculty or its elected senate/council
representatives for:
1. Approval of degree candidates;
2. Development of policies governing the awarding of grades.
B. Through the campus academic senates/councils responsibility shall be
vested in the faculty or its elected senate/council representatives for
developing policies and making recommendations to the campus presidents
on the following matters:
1. criteria and standards for the appointment, retention, awarding of
tenure, promotion and evaluation of academic employees including
preservation of the principle of peer evaluation and provision for
the direct involvement of appropriate faculty in these decisions;
2. determination of membership in the General Faculty;
3. curricular policies, such as admission and degree requirements,
approval of new courses and programs, discontinuance of
academic programs, and academic standards;
4. faculty appointments to institutional task forces, advisory
committees, and auxiliary organizations;
5. academic standards and academic policies governing athletics.
Last Revision 1984: Endorsed by the Senate Attachment to: AS-1217-81/EX 4
FSD: N/A
FAM 402
Previous FAM 025
5
C. The academic senates/councils shall be the primary source of policyrecommendations to the campus president on decisions related to the following
matters:
1. establishment of campus-wide committees on academic or professional matters;
2. the academic role of the library;
3. academic awards, prizes, and scholarships;
4. the academic conduct of students and means for handling infractions;
5. development of institutional missions and goals.
D. The academic senates/councils shall be consulted by the campus presidents
concerning:
1. the academic calendar and policies governing the scheduling of classes;
2. policies governing the appointment and review of academic administrators.
E. This outline of functions and responsibilities is intended to provide the
essentials for a satisfactory system of shared governance but should not
necessarily be viewed as a comprehensive enumeration of such functions
and responsibilities.