FAM 035.3
UNIVERSITY-LEVEL AWARDS
FAM 035.3 Award Policy

Purpose and Scope
The policy governs all aspects of the University-level recognition awards given to instructional
faculty.

Policy Statement
The university-level awards governed by this policy are the highest recognition that the
University bestows to its instructional faculty for their contributions to and support of the
University's mission. These awards shall be considered lifetime legacy awards to promote the
maximum opportunities for recognition.
There are five such awards, granted on the following schedule:
1. The Outstanding Professor Award: Every year.
2. The Golden Apple Award: Every year.
3. The Outstanding Lecturer Award: Every year.
4. The Outstanding Service Award: in - even-numbered years.
5. The Outstanding Scholarship, Research, Creative Activities Award: in odd-numbered
years.

The Office of Undergraduate Studies offers an annual Outstanding Faculty Advisor Award,
which is not governed by this policy. Additional information is available at
https://www.csusb.edu/advising/faculty-staff/outstanding-faculty-advisors
Other awards that are not governed by this policy include college-level awards in teaching;
research, scholarship and creative activity; and service for instructional faculty; and awards for
librarians, counselors, and coaches.

Procedure and Process
University Awards Committee
1

A University Awards Committee shall be assembled each academic year. The Committee will
be responsible for recommending to the President the awards delineated above.
1. Committee Composition and Selection
a. Each college will elect in the Spring semester, one tenured instructional faculty
member, who shall serve a staggered two-year term. A committee member may
not serve more than two consecutive terms. If the Committee is missing a
member(s) when its duties are scheduled to begin, the Faculty Senate EC shall
appoint a temporary committee member until a new member is elected.
b. The current year's Outstanding Professor Award winner will serve as co-chair
with the current year's Golden Apple Award Winner. They will serve as
committee members in the second year for the expressed purpose of providing
guidance to the new Co-chairs. If one or both are unable to serve, the missing cochair(s) shall be appointed by the Executive Committee of the Faculty Senate
from among previous winners of any of the awards.
c. The Executive Committee of the Faculty Senate shall name- a replacement
from the same college for any faculty member of the committee who accepts a
nomination for a given award.
2. Functions of the Committee
a. To establish its timetable and procedures in collaboration with the Provost's
Office.
b. To solicit nominations for the awards by announcing the procedures and
deadline for nominations beginning the third week of the Fall semester.
c. To inform individuals of their nominations.
d. To review and evaluate the nominations for the awards according to facultyestablished criteria.
e. To recommend to the President the names of the award recipients.
f. To join the President in speaking about the awardees' accomplishments during
the recognition events.
3. Timing of the Award Evaluations

2

a. The committee shall determine the recipient of the Outstanding Professor Award
by the fifth to sixth week of the Spring semester.
b. The committee shall determine the recipient for the Outstanding Scholarship,
Research, Creative Activities Award or the Outstanding Service Award by the end of
the Fall semester.
c. The committee shall determine the recipient for the Golden Apple Award by the
end of the Fall semester.
d. The committee shall determine the recipient of the Lecturer's Award in the fifth to
sixth week of the Spring semester.
The Outstanding Professor Award

1. Any student, faculty member, staff member, alumnus, or academic administrator may
nominate one eligible faculty member for the Outstanding Professor Award.
2. Criteria for the Award
a. The nominees shall have been tenure-line instructional faculty members at the
University for at least six years.
b. The nominee shall have a record of particular distinction as a teacher, and in one or
both of professional activity and service. No amount of professional achievement
and/or service shall be a substitute for the basic requirement of excellence in
teaching as the foundation of this award.
c. The nominee shall not have won the Outstanding Professor Award previously.
3. Format for Nomination
a. The committee, in collaboration with the Provost's Office, shall distribute the
criteria, procedures, and deadline for nominations.
b. Nominations shall be made on appropriate forms and shall include a brief statement
of no more than one page explaining why the nominator believes that the faculty
member merits the award.
4. Review Procedures
a. The committee will inform each nominee of the nomination and indicate that
members of the committee will be reviewing their most recent Faculty Activities
Report, classroom visitation reports, and student evaluations.
b. Each nominee shall be required to actively affirm their inclusion in the process. At

3

that time, the nominee may submit an updated curriculum vitae and a statement of
no more than one page explaining why the nominee believes they merit the award.
c. Each nomination shall be supported by the following evaluation documents: 1)
classroom visitation reports, 2) student evaluation of teaching 3) most recent Faculty
Activities Report, and 4) other documents* pertaining to the teaching, professional
development, and/or service areas as defined by the "Procedures and Criteria for
Performance Review and Periodic Evaluation." *As a guideline for #c4, limit submissions
to no more than ten documents in each area showing the most significant
accomplishments. (NOTE: The committee may ask for further documents as the review
process proceeds.)
The Golden Apple Award
1. Any student, faculty member, staff member, alumnus, or academic administrator may
nominate one eligible faculty member for the Golden Apple Award.
2. Criteria for the Award
a. The nominees shall have been tenure-line instructional faculty members at the
University for at least six years.
b. The nominees shall have a record of particular distinction in teaching.
c. The nominees shall not have won the Golden Apple Award previously.
3. Format for Nomination
a. The committee, in collaboration with the Provost's Office, shall distribute the
criteria, procedures, and deadline for nominations.
b. Nominations shall be made on appropriate forms and shall include a brief statement
of no more than one page explaining why the nominator believes that the faculty
member merits the award.
4. Review Procedures
a. The committee will inform each nominee of the nomination and indicate that
members of the committee will be reviewing their Faculty Activities Report,
classroom visitation reports, and student evaluations of teaching.
b. Nominees shall be required to actively affirm their inclusion in the process, and give
the committee permission to review their Personnel Action File). At that time, the
nominees may submit an updated curriculum vitae and a statement of no more than
one page explaining why the nominees believe they merit the award.

4

c. Each nomination shall be supported by the following evaluation documents: 1)
classroom visitation reports, 2) student evaluations of teaching 3) most recent
Faculty Activities Reports, and 4) Any other document pertaining to the teaching
area as defined by the "Procedures and Criteria for Performance Review and
Periodic Evaluation."
The Outstanding Lecturer Award
1. Any student, faculty member, staff member, alumnus, or academic administrator may
nominate one eligible faculty member for the Lecturer's Award.
2. Criteria for the Award
a. The nominees shall be full-time or part-time lecturers at the University, who can
document having taught at least 60 course units at CSU SB.
b. The nominees shall have a record of particular distinction in teaching.
c. The nominees shall not have won the Lecturer's Award previously.
3. Format for Nomination
a. The committee in collaboration with the Provost's Office shall distribute the criteria,
procedures, and deadline for nominations.
b. Nominations shall be made on appropriate forms and shall include a brief statement
of no more than one page explaining why the nominator believes that the faculty
member merits the award.
4. Review Procedures
a. The committee will inform each nominee of the nomination and indicate that
members of the committee will be reviewing their Faculty Activities Report (if
available), classroom visitation reports, and student evaluations of teaching.
b. Each nominee shall be required to actively affirm their inclusion in the process, and
give the committee permission to review their Personnel Action File (if available). At
that time, the nominee may submit a curriculum vitae. In addition, the nominee may
submit a statement explaining why the nominee believes they merit the award, and may
submit no more than three letters of support from the nominee's immediate supervisor
or other faculty members.
c. Each nomination shall be supported by the following evaluation documents: 1)

5

classroom visitation reports, 2) student evaluations of teaching 3) Faculty Activities
Reports (if available), and 4) any other document pertaining to the teaching area as
defined by the "Procedures and Criteria for Performance Review and Periodic
Evaluation."
The Outstanding Service Award
1. Any student, faculty member, staff member, alumnus, or academic administrator may
nominate one eligible faculty member for the Outstanding Service Award.
2. Criteria for the Award
a. The nominees shall have been tenure-line instructional faculty, librarians, counselors,
or coaches at the University for at least six years.
b. The nominee shall have a record of particular distinction in service.
c. The nominee shall not have won the Outstanding Service Award previously.
3. Format for Nomination
a. The committee, in collaboration with the Provost's Office, shall distribute the
criteria, procedures, and deadline for nominations.
b. Nominations shall be made on appropriate forms and shall include a brief statement
of no more than one page explaining why the nominator believes that the faculty
member merits the award.
4. Review Procedures
a. The committee will inform each nominee of the nomination and indicate that
members of the committee will be reviewing their most recent Faculty Activities
Report.
b. Each nominee shall be required to actively affirm their inclusion in the process, and
give the committee permission to review their Personnel Action File. At that time, the
nominees may submit an updated curriculum vitae and a statement of no more than
one page explaining why they believe they merit the award.
c. Each nomination shall be supported by the following evaluation documents: 1)
Faculty Activities Reports, and 2) Any other document pertaining to the service area as
defined by the "Procedures and Criteria for Performance Review and Periodic
Evaluation."

6

The Outstanding Scholarship, Research, Creative Activities Award
1. Any faculty member or academic administrator may nominate one eligible faculty
member for the Outstanding Scholarship, Research, Creative Activities Award.
2. Criteria for the Award
a. The nominees shall have been tenure-line instructional faculty, librarians, counselors
or coaches at the University for at least six years.
b. The nominee shall have a record of particular distinction in professional
development.
c. The nominee shall not have won the Outstanding Scholarship, Research, Creative
Activities Award previously.
3. Format for Nomination
a. The committee shall distribute the criteria, procedures, and deadline for
nominations.
b. Nominations shall be made on appropriate forms and shall include a brief statement
of no more than one page explaining why the nominator believes that the faculty
member merits the award.
4. Review Procedures
a. The committee will inform each nominee of the nomination and indicate that
members of the committee will be reviewing their Faculty Activities Report.
b. Each nominee shall be required to actively affirm their inclusion in the process, and
give the committee permission to review their Personnel Action File. At that time,
the nominee may submit an updated curriculum vitae, a statement of no more than
one page explaining why the nominee believes they merit the award, and an
external letter(s) from people and/or organizations.
c. Each nomination shall be supported by the following evaluation documents: 1) the
most recent Faculty Activities Reports, and 2) no more than ten documents showing
the most significant accomplishments in the professional activities area as defined
by the "Procedures and Criteria for Performance Review and Periodic Evaluation."
(NOTE: The committee may ask for further documents as the review process
proceeds.)

7

The winner shall receive an award from the Provost and the Vice President for Academic
Affairs.
Award Distribution and Recognition Process
1. The recognition event, "ambush," should include acknowledgements given by the
President, Provost, Awards Committee co-chair(s) or a committee member. Other
speakers may include the Faculty Senate Chair, previous winners of the award, and
others who wish to speak on the behalf of the award recipient.
2. The winners shall receive an award from the Provost/Vice President for Academic
Affairs.
3. The winners shall be honored at the annual Faculty Recognition Luncheon.
4. The winners shall be recognized during graduation ceremonies in their college.
5. The winners shall represent the University at the Educational Roundtable, if held.
6. The winners shall be listed along with past recipients on a permanent dedicated
University website page with photos and accomplishments from the inception of the
award to present.

FAM 035.4
EXCEPTIONAL SERVICE TO STUDENTS AWARD
FAM 035.4 Exceptional Service to Students Award (ESSA)

Table of Contents
Purpose and Scope
Policy Statement
Procedure and Process
Approvals
History
Appendix

Purpose and Scope
Pursuant to Article 20, Section 37 of the Collective Bargaining Agreement (CBA), the CSU
provides resources to each campus for assigned time for exceptional service to students based
on its number of full-time equivalent students. This policy sets forth guidelines for the process
of selecting recipients of this award.
This policy shall remain in effect if the relevant article about the Exceptional Service to Students

8

Award is retained in a future CBA.

Policy Statement
The Exceptional Service to Students Award (ESSA) is intended to support student mentoring,
advising, and outreach, especially if these activities support underserved, first-generation,
and/or underrepresented students; the development and implementation of high-impact
educational practices; curricular redesign intended to improve student access and success;
service to the department, college, university, or community that goes significantly beyond the
normal expectations of all faculty; assignment to courses where increases to enrollment have
demonstrably increased workload; and other extraordinary forms of service to students.
Priority shall be given to applications that demonstrate that the quality of the students'
educational experience could not have been maintained without an increase in the faculty
member's workload.
1. Faculty already receiving assigned time for the same general category of activity (e.g.
assigned time for excess enrollments, assigned time for committee service) shall not be
eligible for support from this pool for the same activities.
2. Each award shall consist of three units of assigned time and shall be awarded in the
spring for use in the following academic year.
3. Any unused funds shall rollover for use in the following academic year.
4. CSUSB shall expend all funds allocated to the campus under this program by the end
of the academic year. The Academic Affairs Office shall provide, by mid-August, the
accounting of expenditures in the previous academic year, including any funds carried
over from prior years, to the Faculty Senate Executive Committee and the Chancellor
Office.
5. Costs of the assigned time shall be calculated based on the minimum salary for an
assistant professor.
6. Awards from appeals shall not exceed one course of the annual pool and shall be
funded in the subsequent academic year.
7. While awards are typically to be given for activities actually conducted during the year
for which the award is granted, work of a similar nature in prior years may be noted in
the narrative and acknowledged as establishing a pattern of exceptional service.

Procedure and Process
1. Award Committee
a. Membership: 7 members. The Executive Committee of the Faculty Senate shall
9

appoint one representative from each academic college and one representative
among the SSPARs, librarians, and coaches to two-year staggered terms. The
Associated Students, Inc. shall appoint one student representative to a one-year
term. The committee should be composed by the middle of the fall semester.
b. Functions: to evaluate applications and to periodically review and, if needed, make
recommendations for changes in this policy to the Executive Committee (EC) of
Faculty Senate.

Timeline
Early fall semester

Call for ESSA committee members for
next AY awards

Second week of October

Call for applications, Provost's office
notifies senate of how many awards are
available

Last week of January

Application deadline, committee
convened by Faculty Senate chair

February

Evaluation of applications by ESSA
Committee

Last week in February

Decision deadline - awards determined

First week of March

Awardees notified by Faculty Affairs

2. Eligibility for application
a. All unit 3 employees, including lecturers, are eligible to apply.
b. Previous recipients who have not filed the required post-award report are not
eligible to apply.
c. Faculty members already receiving assigned time for the same general category
of activity (e.g. assigned time for excess enrollments, assigned time for
committee service) shall not be eligible to apply.
3. Application packet
The application packet for the Exceptional Service to Students Award must include the
following.
a. A narrative with the proposed activity, not to exceed two double space pages with a
12-point font. The statement must include compelling evidence of the need and
ability to complete· the activity.

10

b. A letter of support from a CSUSB faculty, chair, administrator, or someone who can
justify the need of the proposed activity,
c. Signatures of department chair and college dean on the proposal indicating their
awareness of submission and that no course assigned time is being provided for the
same general activity.
d. Incomplete applications shall not be considered.
The complete application packet should be submitted as one PDF document, emailed to the
Faculty Senate Office by the deadline, which will be forwarded to the Award Committee.
4. Committee evaluation
The committee shall view the application and select awardees based on the maximum amount
of funds available for that year. The list of awardees shall be submitted to the Provost and the
Vice President of Academic Affairs.
5. Communication of results
The Provost and the Vice President of Academic Affairs or a designee shall provide the list of
awardees to the EC of Faculty Senate, applicants, department chair, and dean of the college.
The Provost's office shall maintain the list of awardees for the previous five years.
6. Appeals
a. Appeals Committee: The Appeals Committee shall be composed of three members
of the Faculty Affairs Committee (FAC) appointed by the EC of Faculty Senate.
b. Timeline and Notification of Decisions: Appeals shall be made, in writing, to the
Chair of Faculty Senate and shall be filed no later than ten (10) university working
days after the date upon which the applicant received the decision. The Chair of the
Faculty Senate will appoint the Appeals Committee within ten university working
days of receiving the first appeal. The Appeals Committee shall complete their
review in no more than two (2) weeks after receipt of the appeal.
The Appeals Committee shall send notification of its decision to the appellant, Chair
of Faculty Senate, and the Provost and the Vice President of Academic Affairs.
Decisions made by the Appeals Committee shall be final and binding and are not
subject to the grievance procedures in Article 10 of the CBA.
7. Post-award report

11

The recipients of this award are required to submit post-award reports to the award committee
via the Faculty Senate Office by the end of the semester following the academic year in which
the award is granted. The report shall provide evidence that the proposed activities were
completed and that the intended impact on the students was achieved.
These reports will be forwarded to the Provost and the Vice President of Academic Affairs or a
designee.

APPENDIX
ESSA APPLICATION
NAME: __________________ RANK: _________ _
COLLEGE: ________________ DATE: _________ _
DEPARTMENT: ____________ _
NOTE: Applicants are strongly encouraged to use these headers in their narrative statements.
1. Description and Timeframe of Activity
2. Compelling Need Met by the Activity
3. Estimated# of Students Benefiting by Activity and Minority Status
4. How Students Will Benefit From This Service
5. Estimated total number of hours to complete this additional activity:
6. Semester during which the assigned time will be applied: _____ _
I affirm that I am not receiving additional assigned time or personal payment for these
activities.
Department chairs and college deans will be notified of submissions for awareness of
submission and that no course assigned time is being provided for the same general activity.
Please submit applications to the Office of Academic Affairs according to the directions
specified in the call for applications by the specified deadline.

12

FAM 035.6
PROCEDURES FOR NOMINATING HONORARY DEGREE
RECIPIENTS
FAM 035.6 Honorary Degree Recipients

Preamble: Each year, each CSU campus may submit the names of up to two candidates for
honorary degrees to the Board of Trustees, which makes the final decision on these awards.
Recommendations are to be submitted by the campus President after consultation “with a
committee, including faculty representation, to review recommendations and to assist in the
development and compilation of materials in support of nominations to be forwarded.”
Procedures:
1. Each Spring term, the Executive Committee of the Faculty Senate shall constitute an
Honorary Degree Committee for the following academic year. This committee will be comprised
of:
A. The provost or designee.
B. Five faculty members, one from each college, selected by the Senate Executive
Committee.
C. A member of the library staff, selected by the Senate Executive Committee.
D. A representative of the University Advancement office, nominated by the President.
2. Early in the Fall term, the Vice President for Academic Affairs/Provost shall invite all
members of the University community and the general public to submit names of possible
recipients of honorary degrees. A deadline of no later than November 1 should be set for these
submissions.
3. The VPAA/Provost shall be responsible for assembling the Honorary Degree Committee, and
instructing the committee on its charge, as soon after the submissions deadline as feasible.
Taking into account the systemwide guidelines for criteria, exclusions, and procedures, the
committee shall consider the names submitted and determine no more than two final
nominees. In the process it may consult with faculty members or others who are specifically
familiar with the accomplishments of certain candidates, or with the fields in which these
candidates have made their mark, as long as complete confidentiality is maintained. The

13

committee is responsible for compiling material to support the candidates it has chosen. No
later than December 1, the committee should forward its choices, together with supporting
material, to the President. The President may then decide whether to forward both, one, or
neither of the proposed recipients to the Board of Trustees.

FAM 036.4
POLICY STATEMENT CONCERNING RESEARCH,
SCHOLARSHIP AND CREATIVE ACTIVITY GRANTS
FAM 036.4 Creative Activity Grants

1. Purpose and Scope
The purpose of these grants is to facilitate faculty in their research, scholarship, and
creative activity which will ultimately lead to their professional growth, and to the
enhancement of the student educational experience. Preference will be given to
probationary tenure-track faculty and to proposals not previously funded but which show
evidence of that initial preparation has already taken place. These grants are in the
following categories:
a. Mini-grants (up to $5,000)
The specific purpose of mini-grants is to provide "seed monies" to support new
projects, or new phases of longer term projects that hold promise of extramural
funding. Faculty submitting a mini-grant proposal must indicate the place of their
project in their long-range research program. These grants may be used for support
such as re-assigned time, student assistants, clerical help, duplicating, computer time,
and supplies and services. In addition, mini-grants may be used to fund equipment
and/or travel specifically related to the project.
b. Summer Research Fellowships.
Summer Research Fellowships are designed to provide faculty with financial
support to start, continue or complete a substantial project of creative activity,
scholarship or research, or an appropriate activity related to the faculty member's
academic discipline. The Fellowship will allow faculty members to apply for either a
stipend or research expenses (eg., supplies, travel, or student support). Examples of
such a project are completion of a manuscript, specialized course work or training, an

14

exhibition or a performance. Fellowship stipends will be will be fixed annually and may
be supplemented by the Faculty Professional Development Coordinating Committee
(FPDCC), the Associate Provost for Research, or the Provost.
c. Faculty Research Awards
Faculty Research Awards provide reassigned time to develop or complete a
substantial project of creative scholarship or research, or an appropriate activity
related to the faculty member's academic discipline such as completion of a
manuscript, specialized course work or training, an exhibition or a performance.
The department/school in which the faculty resides will receive funding of two-course
reassigned time at the internal rate. Faculty may take their Research Leave during any
academic year quarter, excluding summer sessions; the specific quarter will be decided
upon in consultation with the department chair/school director.
2. Funding
The term “college” shall be used to refer to an academic department/school or
equivalent unit for the purpose of this policy. The two equivalent units shall be (a)
counselors, i.e., SSP, ARs, and (b) librarians.
Total funds available for mini-grants are determined annually in accordance with
allocations from the Chancellor's Office. Chancellor's Office funding for Research,
Scholarship and Creative Activities is allocated to the three grant categories by the
Faculty Professional Development Coordinating Committee (FPDCC). The
available funds for mini-grants are assigned to the colleges based on the following
formula:

FTEF = Full-Time Equivalent Faculty, tenured and tenure-track
The Office of Academic Research will distribute the funds to faculty based on
the recommendations of the College Professional Awards Committees and
Deans in accordance with FPDCC allocation guidelines.
3. Eligibility

15

All tenure-track or tenured faculty members are eligible. Faculty who are in the Faculty
Early Retirement Program (FERP) are not eligible to receive these awards.
4. Application
4.1 Application and proposal description shall be made following the appropriate
standardized format which is available from the Office of Academic Research. Only
one completed application per grant category shall be submitted by an individual
faculty member or principal investigator by the indicated deadline. Furthermore,
applicants should avoid submitting the same proposal for funding in more than one
of the categories unless it is clearly indicated the project necessitates dividing it into
several parts. The request for multiple awards must be clearly justified. In the cases of
Faculty Research Awards or Summer Research Fellowships, only one individual or
principal investigator per project may apply.
4.2 Prior Grant Activity: The proposal must include a list of all grants, internal and
external, received in the last three years and proof of successful completion of
each of these grant activities.
4.3 Proposals must clearly show the significance of the project in terms of both the
professional development of the faculty member, and also the body of knowledge of
the faculty member's academic discipline, teaching fields, or areas of library
expertise.
5. Criteria for Evaluation
5.1 Proposals must clearly demonstrate quality in terms of the following:
a) Clarity: The proposal must clearly and concisely describe the project as
a whole using non-specialist language whenever possible.
b) Objectives: The proposal must describe the objectives of the
project and elaborate on the following: 1) the reasons for the
applicant undertaking the project; 2) the purpose of the particular
project; 3) if appropriate, the specific research questions or
hypotheses; and 4) the project's relation to the faculty member’s
present or future research or creative activity.
c) Methods: The proposal must clearly describe the activities, including
methods and procedures, which will be conducted and must clearly
show that these are designed to meet the stated objectives.

16

d) Feasibility: The proposal must present an organized plan of action
which demonstrates that the project is feasible. When appropriate, a
budget (see section 5.2) shall be included to demonstrate that the
project can be conducted in a manner that utilizes effectively the
resources requested.
e) Expected End Product: The proposal must elaborate on the expected
end product of the project. This can include publications (i.e. books,
monographs, articles or scholarly papers), creative activity (i.e.
gallery showings, concerts or theatrical productions), and external
grant proposals.
5.2 Proposals for Mini-Grants must clearly indicate that the budget requested
is necessary. Itemized expenditures are required, with a justification included for each
item.
6. Approval and Awards Process
6.1 Proposals for these grants shall be called for by the Office of Academic
Research in accordance with schedules established by this office.
6.2 The following special approvals may be required before submitting proposals:
6.2.1 Proposals requiring the use of human subjects for research purposes shall
be approved by the Institutional Review Board, should time permit, before
they are submitted. Those still requiring I.R.B. approval after the grants
evaluation shall not be finally released until after such review.
6.2.2 Proposals requiring the use of animal subjects for research purposes shall
be approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC)
before they are submitted.
6.2.3 Proposals requesting reassigned time must have the signatures of the
department chair/school director and college dean indicating that
consultation has occurred.
6.3 Members of College Professional Awards Committees may not submit an application
for a university award during the period of time they are serving on the committee.

17

6.4 All proposals received within the announced deadline schedule shall be distributed
to the appropriate College Professional Awards Committee. The committee shall
prepare a statement of merit for each proposal.
6.4.1 Each Professional Awards Committee for the academic colleges shall
consist of
five faculty members from that college; no more than one per
department/school in colleges where there are five or more
departments/schools. If there are fewer than five departments/schools in that
college, at least one member should come from each department/school. The
Professional Awards Committees for the librarians and the counselors shall
have three members. Members of each College Professional Awards
Committee shall be bargaining-unit-three tenure-track faculty who will not apply
for any grants during their time of service, elected by the faculty of the college
under the supervision of the appropriate Constituent Unit Elections Officer.
Committee members shall be elected to two-year staggered terms.
6.4.2 Statements of merit shall be forwarded to the college office and to the
respective faculty members.
6.4.3 A faculty member may choose to respond to the statement of merit within
five working days. This response shall go to the college office.
6.5 The College Professional Awards Committee shall evaluate and rank all proposals
by category and shall make recommendations for allocations. In making
recommendations, the Committee, where appropriate, shall consider:
a. The quality (clarity, objective, method) and feasibility of the proposed project.
b. Evidence of preparation or preplanning for the proposed project.
c. Whether or not proposals fulfill the purposes for which the specified grant
category
was designed.
d. The faculty member's prior record in the use of all grant awards in the past
three
years.
e. The amounts and appropriateness of the budget request.
6.6 Recommendations from the College Professional Awards Committee shall be
forwarded to the Dean or University Librarian who may choose to make their own

18

individual recommendations. All recommendations shall be forwarded to the Office of
Academic Research, who will then make ranked recommendations to the Vice
President for Academic Affairs/Provost. The Vice President for Academic
Affairs/Provost will make the final decision.
6. After the process is completed, each applicant shall receive a copy of all material
relating to his or her proposal, including the statement of recommendation. A copy
shall also be retained in the office of the College Dean or University Librarian and in
the Office of Academic Research.
7. Report
A report describing use of the award and the completed project shall be submitted by
the award recipient to the Office of Academic Research by the deadline specified in the
“call for proposals.” The report should be an explicit narrative and shall contain
supporting evidence when possible. A file of such reports shall be maintained in the
Office of Academic Research. Failure to submit a timely final report will exclude faculty
members’ proposals for evaluation by the college Professional Awards Committee
during subsequent award cycles. Further, as stipulated in Faculty Professional
Development Program, such reports are required for review by an ad-hoc committee to
determine future awards programmatic needs and to assess the quality of projects
receiving awards.
8. Exception for College-Level Professional Development Resources and Support
The provisions contained herein do not apply to professional development resources
and support provided by a college to its faculty from sources other than those provided
by the Chancellor’s Office. Colleges will develop their own criteria and procedures for
awarding such college-level support and reporting such awards to college faculty.

19

FAM 105.4
POLICY GUIDELINES FOR THE FORMATION
AND REVIEW OF INSTITUTES AND CENTERS
FAM 105.4 POLICY GUIDELINES FOR THE FORMATION AND REVIEW OF INSTITUTES
AND CENTERS

Table of Contents
Purpose and Scope
Definitions
Policy Statement
Approvals
History

Purpose and Scope
Ancillary Units (such as Institutes and Centers) have become the principal instruments by which
a university community can organize particular areas of research, curricular programs, and
service to the community which transcend the boundaries of traditional academic departments
or disciplines. They are characterized by their flexible goals and structure, specific functions,
and are multidisciplinary in nature. Ancillary Units can provide a valuable link among separate
but related academic disciplines and between the academic expertise of the University and the
needs of the surrounding community. All Ancillary Units must contribute to the academic and
strategic mission of California State University San Bernardino (CSUSB). The academic mission
of the University includes instruction, research, and service, including community partnership
and other such enterprises.

Definitions
1. Ancillary Unit: For the purpose of this policy, the term "Ancillary Units" shall be taken to
include centers, institutes, bureaus, laboratories, research groups, councils, consortia, or similar
entities that support the academic missions of the University. It does not apply to other types
of entities that may have similar titles (e.g., the Student Health Center, the Learning Center) but
that either support the nonacademic functions of the University or are housed and funded by
the University administration. This policy applies to all Ancillary Units currently established as
well as those that may be developed in the future.

20

2. Functions of Ancillary Units may include, but are not limited to:
a. conducting opinion polls and focus groups
b. conducting basic research
c. data gathering
d. developing policy studies and analyses
e. disseminating research findings
f. forming a group for submission of grants proposal{s) for support of professional
activities
g. providing a link between the University and outside organizations
h. sponsoring conferences
i. sponsoring, coordinating, and promoting the research of faculty and students from
several departments or colleges.
j. submitting grant/contract proposals, and conducting funded sponsored programs
activity.
3. Ancillary Units shall not offer courses for University credit; however, courses may be offered
in conjunction with a department or college.
4. All Ancillary Units must be reviewed by the Faculty Senate and Provost/Vice President of
Academic Affairs {VPAA) or designee, and be approved by the President. Once approved, these
units have the right to seek outside funding as university entities.
5. Ancillary Units Status: Ancillary Units are to be classified internally based upon the stage of
development and/or adherence to reporting requirements set forth in this policy.
a. Developmental Status: An Ancillary Unit with "developmental" status is a new unit
which will be reviewed at the end of the third year of operation. This "developmental"
status label is to be used only for CSUSB internal purposes, and under most
circumstances should not be used in applications for external funding. After a successful
third-year review, the Ancillary Unit will be granted "active" status. The Ancillary Unit
may formally request another cycle of developmental status if it requires additional
time. An Ancillary Unit with "developmental" status submits an annual report to the
Unit's reporting person {see section 6) and to the Faculty Senate.
b. Active Status: An Ancillary Unit with "active" status has undergone a successful review
at the end of its third year and submits an annual report to the Unit's reporting person
and to Faculty Senate. Once granted "active" status, the Ancillary Unit may be asked to
undergo further review if deemed necessary by the Unit's Reporting Person or by the

21

Provost/VPAA.
c. Probationary Status: An Ancillary Unit that fails to submit an annual report to the
reporting person (see below) or that fails to provide written responses to the CCl's
recommendations within 30 days will be considered to be on "probationary" status. The
reporting person or CCI shall notify the Unit, the designee of the Provost/VPAA, and the
Faculty Senate Office, and the Unit will be given 60 days after notification to submit an
annual report or its written responses to the CCl's recommendations. Failure to
submit the annual report within this time will lead to placement of the Ancillary Unit on
"inactive" status.
d. Inactive Status: An "inactive" Unit may not seek funding or function as an Ancillary
Unit until it has undergone a successful review and has been reinstated by the
Provost/VPAA. To regain "active" status, the Unit must submit required documents (see
section 17) and a written request for reinstatement to the Unit's reporting person, who
will forward the documents along with his/her comments to the Faculty Senate and
Provost/VPAA. The CCI will review the request and forward its recommendation for
reinstatement to the Faculty Senate Executive Committee, which will provide its
recommendation to the Unit's reporting person and the Provost/VPAA.
e. Termination: An Ancillary unit may be terminated if it remains on "inactive" status for
12 months or for other compelling reasons, as determined by the Faculty Senate and
the Provost/VPAA.
6. Reporting Person: The "reporting person" is the head of the academic unit or administrative
division of the University (e.g., department, college, Office of Graduate Studies, Office of
Academic Affairs) who has programmatic oversight of the Ancillary Unit.
7. Director: The "Director" shall be the person or persons who are responsible and accountable
for the activities of the Unit. The "Director" may be a single director, multiple co-directors, an
executive director, or a committee with at least one person who is identified as "responsible"
for the governance of the Ancillary Unit.
8. Annual Report: The "annual report" is the report that the Ancillary Unit shall make each year
to the reporting person. The annual report will include information regarding the Ancillary
Unit's goals and accomplishments, the participation of students and faculty in the Unit's
activities, the Unit's governance and reporting structure, the amount of external funds raised,
units of assigned time, and the use of the University's internal resources.

22

9. Committee for Centers and Institutes (CCI): The CCI shall be established as a special
committee of the Faculty Senate that is composed of one tenure-track faculty member from
each college, one student representative, and two current directors of centers or institutes. The
committee shall also include as an ex officio, non-voting member the Associate Provost for
Academic Research. The CCI is responsible for conducting administration and oversight of the
procedures established in this policy, including:
a. review proposals for the creation of centers and institutes and refer the proposals to
the Executive Committee of the Faculty Senate for action;
b. review annual reports and conduct periodic reviews for centers and institutes and
make recommendations on their status to the Faculty Senate, Provost, and President
c. complete annual updates on the center and institute automated system, including
inputting current contact information for Cl directors and reporting persons;
d. conduct administration and oversight of the completion, submission, tracking, and
storage of center and institute proposals, annual reports, and the procedures for
periodic review;
e. coordinate support and, where appropriate, foster collaboration among centers and
institutes across campus;
f. provide the Executive Committee of the Faculty Senate a report, prepared by the CCI
committee chair, at the end of each semester that includes the status of all Cl annual
reports and a summary of other committee activities related to the duties described
above.

Policy Statement
10. Every Ancillary Unit must be under the programmatic oversight of an academic unit or
administrative division of the University (e.g. department, college, Office of Graduate Studies,
or Office of Academic Affairs} pursuant to Executive Order No. 751, which is available at
http://www.calstate.edu/EO/E0-751.pdf.
11. The Ancillary Unit may choose the leadership structure which best suits the mission of the
Unit, as long as it clearly delineates who is responsible and accountable for activities of the

23

Unit. The responsible person-referred to as the "Director"-should be the most qualified
person/people for the role, where "qualified person" is operationally defined to mean a person,
who has the technical and managerial expertise to assume the role, as well as the capacity to
operate in an academic environment. Under most
circumstances, the Director should be a tenure-track faculty member.
12. Ancillary Units with "developmental" status should consider including an Advisory Board
composed of tenure-track faculty, the Director and where useful, an appropriate number of
community members. Ancillary Units without a faculty director must have an
advisory board with at least two faculty representatives appointed by the Executive Committee
of the Faculty Senate. The members of the Advisory Board shall be approved by the Unit's
reporting person, (e.g. College Dean, Provost/VPAA}. Existing Active
Ancillary Units may also wish to include an Advisory Board.
13. While it is expected that most Ancillary Units will eventually generate enough external
funding to become self-sufficient, the University may provide some initial support in the
form of assigned time, office space, equipment, staff support, etc.
14. Once an Ancillary Unit is approved as "developmental" or "active" status, the Unit may seek
funding from outside entities. All formal agreements or contracts must be signed by the
Executive Director of the University Enterprise Corporation for CSU SB (UEC} or his/her
designee, or the President or his/her designee. See the Policy for the
Administration of Grants and Contracts in Support of Sponsored Program, which is
available at http://policies.csusb.edu/grants_and contracts.htm.
15. All Active Ancillary Units shall be listed in the Campus Directory along with the name(s) and
phone number(s) of the Director, staff, and the address of the office where the Ancillary Unit is
primarily housed.
16. Normally, Ancillary Unit programs and activities fall under campus ownership, including
component activities and program funds, and therefore must follow campus policies and
procedures. In case of externally funded grant and contract activity, policies and procedures
negotiated by the UEC/Sponsored Programs and the external funding
agency must be followed.

Procedure and Process
APPROVAL PROCESS FOR INSTITUTES:

24

17. Proposals for the formation of an Ancillary Unit shall employ the following procedures:
a. A clear statement and delineation of the purpose of the proposed Ancillary Unit. The
statement shall include a description of how the activities of the Unit are intended
to contribute to the accomplishment of the stated purpose and to the academic and
strategic mission of the University.
b. A clear statement of how the Ancillary Unit will be housed within an academic
or administrative division of the University (e.g. department, college, Office of
Graduate Studies, or Office of Academic Affairs) and description of:
i. the proposed organizational and governance structure (including an
organizational chart and signature of all individuals involved in the
Ancillary Unit); and
ii. a clear statement of who is responsible for reporting the Unit's
activities (e.g. Provost/VPAA or designee, Associate Provost of Research,
College Dean, etc.).
c. A statement of any anticipated relationships with public or private agencies or
organizations.
d. A description of the membership, roles, and responsibilities of the Advisory Board.
Any potential conflicts of interest should be identified.
e. Consultation with any affected departments, colleges, etc, shall be conducted.
Comments/feedback, recommendations, and signatures shall be provided by the
chairs and deans of these affected entities.
f. A statement of goals and objectives of the Unit including approximate time frames for
different activities noted. These goals and objectives should be used as the guidelines
for the annual assessment of the Ancillary Unit.
g. Where applicable, a statement of how the unit will conform to accepted standards of
academic research, including peer review, human subject research, animal research, etc.
h. A statement of all possible sources of anticipated funding (internal and external).

25

i. A projected budget for the first three years of operation with revenues and
expenditures, including funding requirements from University sources (Note:
Approval of the Ancillary Unit does not mean that the Unit will receive funding from
the University). The budget report should follow the format established by the CCI
(Appendix A).
18. A proposal for an Ancillary Unit shall be submitted to the Faculty Senate Executive
Committee, which will refer it to the CCI and other appropriate committees (e.g., the General
Education Committee, the University Curriculum Committee, the Faculty Affairs Committee, or
other committees of the Faculty Senate) for review. These committees shall forward their
comments and recommendations, including any concerns and suggested changes for the
original proposal, to the Executive Committee of the Faculty Senate. The proposal along with
the recommendations from the CCI and any other committee(s) that reviewed the proposal
shall be placed on the Faculty Senate agenda as an action item. Additionally, prior to the Faculty
Senate meeting, the Executive Committee of the Faculty Senate shall send an email announcing
its agenda containing the name of the Ancillary Unit. Comments or concerns regarding the
proposed Ancillary Unit may be made to a senator prior to the Faculty Senate meeting for
which this Ancillary Unit's approval is an information item. Full copies of the original proposals
will
be made available in the Faculty Senate Office.
19. The Provost/VPAA (or designee) will make recommendation(s) to the President regarding
approval of the proposal. If the proposal is approved and signed by the President, copies of the
final proposal will be filed in the Unit's reporting person, Office of the Provost/VPAA, and in the
Faculty Senate Office. The newly approved Ancillary Unit shall have "developmental" status and
be subject to review at the end of its third full academic year of operation (see section 5). The
Office of the Provost/VPAA will maintain a list of Ancillary Units, including contact information
for Director(s) of the Unit.
20. If the President does not approve the Ancillary Unit proposal, his/her written comments
and recommendations will be submitted to the Executive Committee of the Faculty Senate and
a copy will be sent by the Office of the Faculty Senate to the originator(s) of the proposal. The
President's written comments and recommendations will also be included on the Faculty
Senate agenda as an information item.
21. Upon approval, the Ancillary Unit may seek funding from the University and from external
sources. The approval of the Ancillary Unit does not mean that the requested university

26

resources will be provided. The decision for university resources will be made by the President
or Provost/VPAA or designee.
ANNUAL REPORTS:
22. By October 1st of each year, the CCI will initiate the procedures for the submission of
annual reports and the completion of periodic reviews. The CCI will send fillable electronic
forms (using Adobe Sign or another electronic platform) to the Units' directors which will be
used for the submission of annual reports. The CCI is responsible for updating its record of
Units' directors and contact information prior to initiating the procedures. The CCI shall forward
its updated record of contact information for centers and institutes to the Associate Provost for
Academic Research who is responsible for submitting it to the Chancellor's Office.
23. By October 30th of each year, each Ancillary Unit will submit an annual report of activities
for the previous academic year using the electronic form sent by the CCI. The CCI is responsible
for routing each annual report to the Unit's reporting person and Provost/VPAA. The Unit's
reporting person will submit their recommendations by December 15 using the electronic form.
The Unit's reporting person will include with their recommendation the method used for the
review (e.g., what elements were evaluated, including budget and accomplishments; and what
discussions were held). The CCI is responsible for routing the reporting person's
recommendations to the Units' directors.
24. The Ancillary Unit may submit attachments with their annual report where applicable.
ANCILLARY UNIT REVIEW PROCESS:
25. The CCI will review each Ancillary Unit once every five years. If at the conclusion of the
review there are one or more unsatisfactory outcomes, the next review may be scheduled in
fewer than five years. In addition, the Unit's reporting person, the Provost/VPAA, or the
Executive Committee of the Faculty Senate may initiate the review process for an Ancillary Unit.
26. For the CCl's periodic review of the Ancillary Unit, the CCI shall obtain from the Faculty
Senate office an original or revised proposal for the Ancillary Unit. The CCI shall also
obtain copies of the annual reports since the last review of the Ancillary Unit, which the
CCI is responsible for storing on a University approved cloud (Microsoft Sharepoint or
another online cloud service);
For the Ancillary Unit's periodic review, the Unit's Director(s) will provide a short cover memo
that explains the contents and highlights of these annual reports

27

27. The CCI will review the material provided by the Ancillary Units, recommend a status for
them (from section 5 above), and indicate problems if they exist. The CCI will evaluate the Unit
using the following criteria:
a. the success of the Ancillary Unit in meeting the goals and objectives outlined in the
original approved proposal;
b. the effective use of all internal University support;
c. the success of obtaining external support and the use of that support;
28. The report of the CCI shall be submitted, as completed, to the Provost, Unit Reporting
Person, relevant College Dean, Director(s), Sponsored Programs, Executive Committee, and
President by March 30th. The report will include the evaluation criteria and methods used to
review the Unit. Within 30 days of receiving the CCl's report, Ancillary Units may respond in
writing to any recommendations made by the CCI. The Unit's written response shall be attached
to the Unit's annual report, included in the formal record of the review, and forwarded to the
Provost/VPAA.
29. The Senate shall receive the reports as information items. The Provost/VPAA (or designee)
shall review the report and make recommendations on the status of the Ancillary Unit as
"continuing developmental (to be reviewed in 3 years)," "active," "inactive," "probationary," or
"termination." The report and recommendation(s) will be forwarded to the President by May
15th, who shall make the final decision.
30. Upon discontinuance or termination of an Ancillary Unit, all residual funds and property
become custody of the academic unit or administrative division of the Reporting Person and
shall be used for similar programs/activities that advance the mission of the campus.

28

FAM 107.3
ACADEMIC AFFAIRS DECENTRALIZATION
BUDGET FUNDING
(General Funds)
FAM 107.3 Academic Affairs Decentralization Budget Funding (General Funds)

A. Faculty Position Funding Process
1. Faculty Serialized Positions
(a) All currently filled faculty positions will be transferred to each college by the end of
the 1997/98 fiscal year.
(b) Unfilled positions will be transferred to colleges, effective July 1, 1998 based on the
1997/98 faculty line allocations. Unfilled positions will be serialized and funded at the
Assistant Professor Step 1 level, using the 1998 faculty salary schedule. Corresponding
benefits will be maintained centrally by Academic Affairs since these new faculty lines
are going to be funded by converting current part-time faculty funds to serialized faculty
positions. Whenever colleges fill a vacant serialized position, Academic Affairs will fund
the 30% benefit cost.
2. New Tenure-Track Faculty Appointments
(a) Starting with the 1998/99 Academic Year, each college will be responsible for
budgeting and assigning a serial position to newly hired (tenure track 2360 class code or
full-time lecturer 2358 class code) faculty.
(b) Colleges will also have the responsibility for converting all vacant faculty serial
positions used to support part-time faculty personnel to the 911 part-time faculty
blanket for the Academic Year. A position transfer form will need to be sent to the
Budget Office so that funds can be transferred to the part-time faculty blanket.

3. New Temporary Full-Time Appointments
Colleges will budget and monitor all new temporary full-time faculty appointments. Such
appointments may be made by filling an existing serialized position.

29

4. Part-Time Faculty Appointments
Colleges will budget and monitor all temporary part-time faculty appointments using funds
from a serialized position.
(a) Conversion of Serialized Positions Colleges, after careful consideration, may convert
a vacant faculty serial position to support other needs in the College. This may be done
on a one-time basis or on a permanent basis. If a faculty serial position is converted on a
permanent basis, the college will still need to meet their FTES within their allocated
faculty lines. All permanent conversions from faculty positions will have to have the
approval of the Vice President for Academic Affairs/Provost.
5. Faculty Leaves
(a) Leave-without-Pay (LWOP)
Colleges will receive full funding at the faculty member's rank and step for the length of
time the faculty member is on LWOP.
(b) Difference -in-Pay Leave (DIP)
Colleges will receive the equivalent salary of an Instructor step 1. The faculty member
receives the difference between an Instructor step 1 and their current rank and step.
(c) Sabbatical
(1) Faculty on one term of sabbatical leave receive their full pay and benefits.
(2) Faculty on two quarters leave receive 3/4 of their pay; colleges receive 1/4 of
the faculty member's rank and step.
(3) Faculty on sabbatical for the academic year receive 50% of their pay; colleges
receive the other 50% of the faculty member's salary at the faculty member's
rank and step.
Because sabbatical leaves are not funded by the Chancellor's Office or Academic Affairs, each
college should consider establishing a separate fund to wholly or partially support sabbatical
leave.

B. Staff Position Funding Process

30

1. Staff Serialized Positions
(a) Staff serialized positions will be transferred to the college/unit during the 1997-98
spring quarter. These positions are permanent positions allocated to each college/unit
and are part of the staff personnel baseline. The college/unit will receive unused funds
remaining in all vacant positions during the 1997-98 fiscal year. Funds returned to the
college/unit can be transferred to any line item including supplies and services or
equipment.
(b) During the 1998-99 fiscal year and thereafter, if a staff serialized position becomes
vacant the college unit has the flexibility to do the following:
(1) The position can be recruited at the same classification and at the position's
funded salary or
(2) The position can be changed to another classification (with Human
Resources' review of the job description) to support the goals of the college/unit.
If the reclassification requires additional funds the college/unit will need to cover
the difference from their operating expense budget. The University will cover the
benefits up to the monetary level of the prior benefits. If additional benefits are
needed for the position the college/unit will have to cover the cost or
(3) The position can be downgraded. Unused funds returned to the college/unit
or
(4) The position can be eliminated with the funds (including benefits) returned to
the college/unit.
2. New Serialized Staff Positions
New staff positions requested by the college/unit will require the review of Human Resources
for the appropriate classification. The college/unit will cover the cost of the position including
benefits.

C. Reappropriation of Prior Year Balances
For the 1997-98 fiscal year all unspent funds can be carried over to the next fiscal year.
However, every effort should be made to use allocated funds (especially baseline funds)
31

during the year they were allocated. Requests for funds to be carried over including one-time
funds should be sent to Academic Affairs as one request under a 4599 end of year (EOY)
carryover subcode. Academic Affairs will combine all requests and will submit one request to
the University. Funds requested to be carried over will be allocated to the college/unit during
the first quarter of the next fiscal year. However, if the college/unit has an unanticipated deficit
at the end of the fiscal year, the funds to cover the deficit will be deducted from the carry over
funds before the funds are transferred. If the college/unit reflects a deficit at the end of the
fiscal year and there are no carry over funds, the amount of the deficit will be deducted from
the following year's budget before baseline allocations are transferred.

D. Transfer of Funds Between Budget Line Items
All funds can be transferred between line items in Academic Affairs with the exception of the
Educational Opportunity Program (EOP) and the Junior Faculty Support Development fund.

FAM 112.5
ESTABLISH OR RENAME ACADEMIC DEPARTMENT
OR SCHOOL
FAM 112.5 Establish or Rename Academic Department or School

Purpose and Scope
The purpose of an academic department or school is to support the mission of the University by
offering academic programs or courses in the disciplines it houses, promoting academic inquiry
and critical thinking within and across disciplines, and engaging in disciplinary and
interdisciplinary research, scholarship, community service, and creative activities. This policy
provides criteria and guidelines for the establishment of a new department, designation of a
unit as a school, and changing the name of a department or school without changing its
structure or designation.

Definitions
1. For the purpose of this policy, the terms "director" and "directors" shall refer specifically

32

to the administrative head of a "school." The terms do not apply to other "directors" of
programs housed within departments/schools (e.g., graduate programs, credential
programs, etc.)

Policy Statement
1. To qualify as an academic department or school, the proposed entity must:
a. Intend to offer a set of academic courses, approved through the appropriate FAM
designated curricular process.
b. Ensure to its faculty, the rights and responsibilities of Academic Freedom, as
outlined by FAM 355.6 (Statement Concerning Professional Ethics and
Responsibilities)
c. Provide a plan for a sufficient number of tenure-line faculty, with the assistance of
associated departments when necessary, to provide appropriate curriculum and to
engage meaningfully in shared governance activities.
2. Criteria for the designation of a unit as a school may vary by discipline but should address
issues such as:
a. Professional accreditation or licensing/certification requirements for graduates
b. Established (or emerging) practice for disciplinary terminology in higher education
c. Reorganization of logical subunits within a college, if needed
d. Enhanced potential for procuring grants, contracts or other significant program
funding/resources (e.g. endowments, scholarships, sponsorships).
e. Improvements in services to students, faculty, staff, and community.
f. How such a designation can contribute to the recruitment and retention of a highquality faculty
3. If a department or school wishes to change its name without making structural or
designation changes, it must comply only with item II. Department/School Name Change.

Procedure and Process
Procedures for the Establishment of a New Academic Department or School
1. Initiation of Proposal
a. Faculty members, departments, or administrative officers of the University may
initiate a proposal for a new academic department or school within a college. Ideally,
initiators should collaborate with stakeholders (including related departments,
community members, administrators, etc.) as part of the proposal process.

33

b. The initial request should be submitted in writing to the appropriate college dean(s),
who will consult with the Provost or designee, and other administrators as needed.
2. New Department or School Proposal: The proposal should be organized as follows:
a. The exact name of the proposed academic program and name(s) of the
individual(s) preparing the proposal;
b. A list of stakeholders and their statements of support (or other comments).
c. In the case of a "school" (not department) proposal, the criteria that provide the
rationale and justification for creating the school (see: purpose and scope).
d. The proposed date of implementation and the appropriate timeline for the
process of implementation;
e. The number of faculty projected in the new department or school's first year of
operation including names of existing faculty, and a statement of how the proposal
might assist with the recruitment and retention of diverse, quality faculty, including the
names of existing faculty who would be moved from other department(s) and/or
school(s).
f. The courses, curricula, programs, degrees to be administered by the new department
or school;
g. Estimation of effects that this change would have on other department(s) or
school(s). If the new department or school is breaking away from existing
academic programs and/or departments, said entities need to be involved in
meaningful consultation.
h. Results of a vote from each department or school directly affected, as well as
written comments from affected academic program chair(s)/director(s) and
faculty should be solicited and appended. Anonymity should be respected
throughout the process including secret ballots and written comments. Voting
should be implemented by the College Elections Officer according to Faculty
Senate elections processes.
i. Any new resources and support needed during each of the first three years of

34

operation and plan for long-term support. If known, also include a possible
source(s) of funding and a detailed budget of the new department or school.
j. A clear rationale for how the proposed department or school will advance the
objectives of the University and College's missions and strategic plans.
3. New Department/School Proposal: Procedure for Approval
a. The complete initial proposal must be submitted to the appropriate college
dean(s) for consultation and signature(s). The college dean(s) shall provide
written comments/ recommendations to the originator(s) of the proposal.
b. After a consultation, the proposal may be revised and resubmitted to the college
dean(s) for further review.
c. The revised proposal along with comments and recommendations from the college
dean(s) will then be forwarded to the Executive Committee (EC) of the Faculty Senate,
which will seek recommendations from the Educational Policy and Resources
Committee (EPRC) and, if necessary, recommendations from other appropriate senate
committee
d. The recommendations and comments from the consulting committees will be
submitted to the EC of the Faculty Senate.
e. The EC of Faculty Senate will include the proposal on the Faculty Senate agenda as
a two-reading item.
f. Upon review by the Faculty Senate, the proposal and all comments and
recommendations will be forwarded to the VP of Academic Affairs, who will, in
turn, submit comments and recommendations to the President of the University.
g. If the President does not approve the proposal, s/he will return the proposal to
the EC of Faculty Senate with rationale for disapproval, comments, and
recommendations. The EC of Faculty Senate will share this information with the
originators of the proposal.

h. If at any point in the process, where the proposal is not approved, and the

35

originators wish to pursue the process, they will need to re-submit the proposal
starting from the beginning.
4. Timeline; Timeline reflects an academic year.
5. All efforts should be made to avoid unnecessary delays for each step of the review
process. A recommended timeline from submission to final approval or disapproval is:
a. Dean first review: 3 weeks
b. Revisions (if needed): 2 weeks
c. Dean second review (f there were revisions): 2 weeks
d. EPRC: 3 weeks
e. Faculty Senate Executive Committee: 3 weeks
f. Faculty Senate: 4 weeks (depending on Faculty Senate schedule)
g. Provost and VPAA: 2 weeks
h. President: 6 weeks
6. Solicitation of External Funding
a. The new department or school must be approved prior to any formal solicitation
of funds or formal gift agreement.
7. New Degree Programs within New Department/School
a. If there is a new degree program associated with the newly formed
department/school, the proposers shall follow all guidelines provided by current
Academic Policies at the State and Campus-level for curriculum development.

Department/School Name Change
1. Proposals for changing the name of the department or school must be initiated by the
faculty member(s) within that department or school. A majority vote of the faculty in the
academic department or school is required to move the proposal forward. If the majority
is met, appropriate curricular procedures should be followed to update the University
Bulletin.

36

FAM 112.35
POLICY ON PROCEDURES TO MERGE, TRANSFER, OR
ABOLISH AN EXISTING ACADEMIC DEPARTMENT OR SCHOOL
FAM 112.35 Merge, Transfer, or Abolish a Department or School

I. Merging, Transferring, or Abolishing Existing Academic Departments, Schools,
or Interdisciplinary Programs
A. Initiation of Proposal
(1) Faculty members, Deans, the Provost, or the University President may
initiate a proposal to merge, transfer, or abolish an academic department
or school.
(2) The initial request should be submitted in writing to the appropriate college
dean(s), department chair(s), the Faculty Senate Chair, and the
Provost/VP of Academic Affairs. Because of the potential impact on
colleges, departments/schools, faculty, staff, and students, the proposal
must follow the guidelines and review process set forth below.
B. Definitions
Definition of “school” and “director” can be found in FAM 460: Policy On Procedures To
Establish A New Academic Department or School; Or To Change The Name Of An
Existing Academic Department or School, sections 1.B.1-3.
C. Merging Department/School/Interdisciplinary Program Proposal: Contents
(1) Name(s) of the department(s)/school(s) involved and name(s) of
individual(s) preparing the proposal;
(2) Proposed date of implementation and appropriate timeline for the process
of implementation;
(3) Rationale for the merger. The rationale should also include possible
consequences if the merger does not take place. Merger of
department(s)/school(s) should not occur solely for budgetary reasons
except in extraordinary circumstances.
(4) Number of faculty from each department or school involved in the merger.
(In general, all academic units should have a minimum of five existing full-

37

time faculty);
(5) Proposed plan of courses, curriculum, programs, degrees to be
administered by the merged academic unit.
(6) Possible effects this change would have on all affected academic units,
including faculty, support staff, students, curriculum, program(s), degrees,
detailed operating budgets (existing and proposed), space, FTES, etc. If
the proposal includes a request to change the name of an existing academic unit,
it must follow guidelines in FAM 460: Policy On Procedures To Establish A New
Academic Department or School; Or To Change The Name Of An Existing
Academic Department or School, section 2.A.
(7) Details of consultation with any existing departments or schools whose
activities and interest might overlap with those of the proposed merged
department(s)/school(s). In addition to consultation with chairs/directors of
academic units, the faculty of affected departments/schools must be invited to
submit written comments and concerns. Anonymity should be respected
throughout the process.
(8) The results of a vote in each department or school to be merged using a
secret ballot procedure.
(9) Any new or adjusted resources and support needed. If known, possible
sources of funding should be included.
D. Proposal to Abolish Department or School
(1) Name of the department or school involved and name(s) of the
individual(s) submitting the proposal.
(2) Proposed date of abolition and an appropriate timeline for the process.
(3) Rationale for the abolition of the department or school. The rationale
should include possible consequences if the abolition does not take place.
Dissenting opinions may also be included. A department or school should
not be abolished solely for budgetary reasons except in extraordinary
circumstances.

38

(4) Details of consultation with any existing department(s)/school(s) whose
activities and interests might be affected by the abolition. In addition to
consultation with the department chair(s)/school director(s), faculty of all
affected department(s)/school(s) must be invited to submit written
comments and concerns. Anonymity should be respected throughout the
process.
(5) Detailed plan of how faculty and staff from the abolished department or
school will be transferred (including FERP and unfilled faculty positions) to
other department(s)/ school(s) and how the decisions for transfer will be
made. Faculty from the proposed abolished department/school may
submit a written request for transfer to another department or school per
FAM 525, Policy Concerning Faculty Departmental Transfer.
(6) Results of a vote from the department or school being abolished using a
secret ballot procedure.
(7) Possible effects this change would have on all affected
department(s)/school(s), including faculty, support staff, students,
curriculum, program(s), degrees, detailed operating budgets (existing and
proposed), space, FTES, etc. If the proposal includes a request to change
the name of an existing department or school, it must follow guidelines in
FAM 460: Policy On Procedures To Establish A New Academic Department or
School; Or To Change The Name Of An Existing Academic Department or School,
section 2.A.
E. Proposal to Transfer Department/School/Interdisciplinary Program:
Contents
(1) Name of the department or school involved and name(s) of the
individual(s) submitting the proposal.
(2) Proposed date of transfer and an appropriate timeline for the process.
(3) Rationale for the transfer of the academic unit. The rationale should
include possible consequences if the transfer does not take place. An
department or school should not be transferred solely for budgetary
reasons except in extraordinary circumstances.

39

(4) Possible effects this change would have on all affected academic units,
including faculty, support staff, students, curriculum, programs, degrees,
FTES, detailed operating budget, space, etc. If the proposal includes a
request to change the name of an existing academic unit, it must follow
guidelines in FAM 460: Policy On Procedures To Establish A New
Academic Department, School, Or Interdisciplinary Program; Or To
Change The Name Of An Existing Academic Department, School, Or
Interdisciplinary Program, section 2.A.
(5) Detailed plan of how faculty and staff from the abolished department or
school will be transferred (including FERP and unfilled faculty positions) to
other academic units and how the decisions for transfer will be made.
Faculty from the department or school being transferred may submit a
written request for transfer to a different college per FAM 525 (Policy
Concerning Faculty Departmental Transfer).
(6) Details of consultation with any existing academic units whose activities
and interest might overlap with those of the department or school to be
transferred. In addition to consultation with administrative leaders of
academic units, the faculty of affected academic units must be invited to
submit written comments and concerns. Anonymity should be respected
throughout the process.
(7) The results of a vote in each department or school to be merged using a
secret ballot procedure.
(8) Any new or adjusted resources and support needed. If known, possible
sources of funding should be included. The results of a vote from the
department or school being transferred using the established secret ballot
procedure. A simple majority of all tenure track faculty from the
department or school being transferred is needed for approval.
F. Procedure for approval
(1) The initial proposal must be submitted to the appropriate college dean(s)
for consultation and signature(s). The college dean(s) shall provide written
comments/ recommendations to the originator(s) of the proposal.
(2) After consultation, the proposal may be revised to reflect the comments
and recommendations provided.

40

(3) The revised proposal along with comments and recommendations from
the college dean(s) will then be forwarded to the Executive Committee
(EC) of the Faculty Senate, which will seek recommendations from
Educational Policy and Resources Committee (EPRC) and, if necessary,
recommendations from other appropriate senate committees will also be
sought.
(4) The recommendations and comments from the EPRC (and other senate
committees consulted) will be submitted to the EC of the Faculty Senate.
(5) The EC of Faculty Senate will include the proposal on the Faculty Senate
agenda as an information item.
(6) Upon review by the Faculty Senate, the proposal and all pertinent
comments and recommendations will be forwarded to the Provost/VP of
Academic Affairs, who will in turn submit comments and recommendations
to the President of the University for approval.
(7) If the President does not approve the proposal, s/he will return the
proposal to the EC of Faculty Senate with comments and
recommendations. The EC of Faculty Senate will share the comments and
recommendations with the originator(s) of the proposal.
(8) If the originators wish to pursue the process, they will need to re-submit
the proposal from the beginning.

FAM 117.2
DEPARTMENT OF AEROSPACE AND MILITARY SCIENCE STUDIES
FAM 117.2 - Department of Aerospace Military Science

Purpose and Scope
Recognizing that the U.S. Air Force and U.S. Army provide a valuable educational experience for

41

students, the University establishes a special department for the purpose of organizational
consistency and governance.

Policy Statement
Herein the University establishes a special and distinct department Aerospace and Military
Science studies. The U.S. Air Force and U.S. Army provide a variety of valuable courses and a
minor to our student body. As a special department within the university, it will operate in a
modified fashion as compared to other academic departments in the university. Specifically:
a. The department will be administered by a commander as designated by the U.S. Air
Force.
b. Instruction within the department will be provided by designated military personnel.
They are not subject to the University's hiring and RPTpolicies
c. Courses will be developed and approved by the Commander in consultation with
military officials and may not conform to the provisions of FAM 822.5.
d. The Commander will consult with the Dean of the College in which the department is
housed on budgetary and university and college responsibilities.
Establishment of this department does not create a precedent for the creation of other special
departments.

FAM 355.6
PROFESSIONAL ETHICS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
FAM 355.6 Professional Ethics and Responsibilities

Purpose and Scope
The purpose of this policy is to maintain ethical standards and define the responsibilities and
accountability as faculty {Unit 3 employees of the University). Ethics in research and creative
activities are addressed in the Policy on Upholding Research Integrity and Responding to the
Allegations of Research Misconduct: https://www.csusb.edu/policies/administration-grantsand-contractssupport-sponsored-programs-policy
Policy Statement
This policy defines and provides guidance for ethical and accountability for faculty as
colleagues, role models, and teachers, specifically:

42

1. Professors, guided by a deep conviction of the worth and dignity of the advancement
of knowledge, recognize the special responsibilities placed upon them. Their primary
responsibility to their subject is to seek and to state the truth as they see it. To this end
professors devote their energies to developing and improving their scholarly
competence. They accept the obligation to exercise critical self-discipline and judgment
in using, extending and transmitting knowledge.
They practice intellectual honesty. Although professors may follow subsidiary interests,
these interests must never seriously hamper or compromise their academic freedom or
Inquiry.
2. As teachers, professors encourage the free pursuit of learning in their students. They
hold before them the best scholarly and ethical standards of their discipline. Professors
demonstrate respect for students as individuals and adhere to their proper roles as
intellectual guides and counselors. Professors make every reasonable effort to foster
honest academic conduct and to assure that their evaluations of students reflect each
student's true merit. They respect the confidential nature of the relationship between
professor and student. They avoid any exploitation, harassment, or discriminatory
treatment of students. They acknowledge significant academic or scholarly assistance
from them. They protect their academic freedom.
3. As colleagues, professors have obligations that derive from common membership in
the community of scholars. Professors do not discriminate against or harass colleagues.
They respect and defend the free inquiry of associates. In the exchange of criticism and
ideas, professors show due respect for the opinions of others. Professors acknowledge
academic debt and strive to be objective in their professional judgment of colleagues.
Professors accept their share of faculty responsibilities for the governance of their
institution. As members of an academic institution, professors seek above all to be
effective teachers and scholars. Although professors observe the stated regulations of
the institution, provided the regulations do not contravene academic freedom, they
maintain their right to criticize and seek revision. Professors give due regard to their
paramount responsibilities within their institution in determining the amount and
character of work done outside it. When considering the interruption or termination of
their service, professors recognize the effect of their decision upon the program of the
institution and give due notice of their intentions.
4. As members of their community, professors have the rights and obligations of other

43

citizens. Professors measure the urgency of these obligations in the light of their
responsibilities to their subject, to their students, to their profession, and to their
institution. When they speak or act as private persons they avoid creating the
impression of speaking or acting for their college or university. As citizens engaged in a
profession that depends upon freedom for its health and integrity, professors have a
particular obligation to promote conditions of free inquiry and to further public
understanding of academic freedom.
5. In accounts of their own professional activities (FARs, AARs, applications for grants
and leaves and the like), faculty members are held to the same standards of honesty as
they are in their professional work itself.
6. Suspected violations of these standards should be called to the attention of the
Associate Provost for Faculty Affairs and Development, who is empowered to conduct
an
investigation and take appropriate action. However, observed, suspected, or apparent
misconduct in research and creative activities shall be reported to the Associate Provost
for Research and is subject to the Policy on Upholding Research Integrity and
Responding to the Allegations of Research Misconduct.

FAM 361.4
FACULTY EXCHANGE PROGRAM
FAM 361.4 Faculty Exchange Program.pdf

A faculty exchange may be arranged within the CSUC system, with another private or public
institution of higher learning. Faculty exchanges are primarily for faculty who have been at an
institution for an extended period of time and who would, therefore, most benefit by the
renewal which may be gained from an exchange agreement. Exchanges are made for a period
of one academic year.
The following criteria will be applied in evaluating requests for faculty exchange. Only tenured
faculty are eligible for faculty exchange, except in unusual circumstances. The faculty member's
Department Chairman and College Dean must approve the exchange and certify that the
absence of the faculty member will not curtail nor have a negative effect on the academic
program. There must be a tangible demonstration of prospects for the professional growth of
the faculty member or for other benefits for this institution. In order that there not be too great

44

a disruption to a department's academic program, normally no more than 20% of the tenured
faculty of any department may be on leave at any one time.
The responsibility lies with the faculty member to initiate the exchange. Thus, a faculty member
bears the burden of finding the exchanging faculty member. A faculty member should request
approval for a proposed exchange in a written memo to his or her Department Chairman and
College Dean, in which the particulars of the exchange are outlined. The exchanging faculty
member coming to this campus must be acceptable to the gaining department here. Faculty
exchanges are normally made by two faculty members in the same department or discipline.
However, an exchange between faculty or differing disciplines is permissible if appropriate
arrangements are made and if no staffing problems result. A faculty exchange should be
arranged sufficiently early in the academic year to ensure that appropriate curricular and
scheduling arrangements can be made.
Normal faculty appointment procedures, such as the development of a dossier and an
interview, are followed in all faculty exchanges. A written exchange agreement, developed by
the Office of Academic Affairs, will be signed by all faculty involved in the exchange and by
appropriate administrative officers of the institutions. Appropriate Faculty Benefits, such as
accrual of time toward sabbatical leave or an earned merit salary increase will be specified in
the exchange agreement. Arrangements for travel expenses, if the exchange is within the CSUC
system and if the distance between campuses is greater than 100 miles, may be arranged
through the Office of Academic Affairs. Upon completion of the exchange, the faculty member
shall file a report with the Office of Academic Affairs detailing the experience gained during the
exchange.

FAM 400
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF UNIVERSITY PROFESSOR’S
(AAUP) STATEMENT ON ACADEMIC FREEDOM
FAM 400 Academic Freedom.pdf

Resolved: Academic freedom is the indispensable quality of institutions of higher education. As
the AAUP's core policy statement argues, "institutions of higher education are conducted for
the common good and not to further the interest of either the individual teacher or the
institution as a whole. The common good depends upon the free search for truth and its free
exposition" (1940 Statement of Principles on Academic Freedom and Tenure).

45

For more than ninety years the AAUP has been engaged in developing standards for protecting
academic freedom and in working for the acceptance of these standards by the community of
higher education. The Association has long been viewed as the authoritative voice of the
academic profession in this regard. Statements, reports, and policies dealing with academic
freedom, as well as with other key issues, are published in the AAUP's Policy Documents and
Reports, also known as the "Redbook."

FAM 402
RESPONSIBILITIES OF ACADEMIC SENATES
WITHIN A COLLECTIVE BARGAINING CONTEXT
FAM 402 Academic Senates Within a Collective Bargaining Context

I. Collegiality and Collective Bargaining
On September 13, 1978, Governor Edmund G. Brown, Jr., signed into law AB 1091, The
California Higher Education Employer-Employee Relations Act (HEERA). (Education Code Section
3560, et. Seq.). This legislation provides faculty members of the CSUC an opportunity to
determine whether they wish to be represented by an exclusive agent in negotiations on
"wages, hours of employment, and other terms and conditions of employment" (HEERA,
Section 3561, r.). This section of the Education Code also specifies the intent of the Legislature
to preserve, under collective bargaining, traditional shared governance mechanisms, including
consultation, and the principle of peer review in faculty personnel decisions. These intentions
are expressed in Section 3561 b. of the HEERA, which reads as follows:
The Legislature recognizes that joint decision-making and consultation between administration
and faculty or academic employees is the long-accepted manner of governing institutions of
higher learning and is essential to the performance of the educational missions of such
institutions, and declares that it is the purpose of this act to both preserve and encourage that
process. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to restrict, limit or prohibit the
full exercise of the functions of the faculty in any shared governance mechanisms or practices
including the Academic Senate of the University of California and the divisions thereof, the
Academic Senates of The California State University and Colleges, and other faculty councils,
with respect to policies on academic and professional matters affecting The California State

46

University and Colleges, the University of California, or Hastings College of the Law. The
principal of peer review of appointment, promotion, and retention, and tenure for academic
employees shall be preserved.
This document has been prepared to describe the respective responsibilities of the Academic
Senate of the CSUC and of local Senates or Councils in this collective bargaining context. The
relationships, functions, and responsibilities proposed in this document reflect consideration of
HEERA, the Constitution of the Academic Senate of The California State University and Colleges
and tradition and practice in the CSUC.
II. The Traditional Role of the Academic Senate in the CSUC.
The Trustees of the California State Colleges approved the Constitution of the Academic Senate
on March 8, 1963. Prior to this a majority of the voting faculty at each of a majority of the
college campuses had approved the document. Encouragement for the establishment of the
systemwide Academic Senate, as well for the creation of an Academic Senate on each campus,
came from the Chancellor, members of the Board of Trustees and the California Legislature.
The 1961 Legislature adopted Senate Resolution No. 98 and Assembly Concurrent Resolution
No. 78 requesting the Trustees to establish an Academic Senate at each college "wherein the
faculty members shall be freely elected by their colleagues for the purpose of representing
them in the formulation of policy on academic and professional matters." Senate Resolution
No. 20, which
resolved that the Trustees consider establishing an Academic Senate for the CSUC system, was
under discussion in the Senate Rules Committee when the Senate was created in 1963.
An examination of the Constitution of the Academic Senate CSUC, as approved by the Board of
Trustees, reveals the official purposes of the Senate:
It shall be the purpose of the Academic Senate of The California State University and Colleges to
serve as the official voice of the faculties of The California State University and Colleges in
matters of systemwide concern; to consider matters concerning systemwide policies and to
make recommendations thereon; to endeavor to strengthen the Senates and Councils of the
several colleges; and to assume such responsibilities and perform such functions as may be
delegated to it by the Chancellor or the Trustees of The California State University and Colleges.
Senate participation in academic, professional, and administrative matters during the 18 years
of its existence evidences a tradition of shared governance in the CSUC and suggests
appropriate responsibilities for the Senate under HEERA. The collective bargaining act makes

47

explicit provision for the preservation of this tradition and mandates continuing senate
involvement in academic and professional matters. (See HEERA, Section 3561 b., cited above.)
III. Academic Senate Participation in Systemwide Governance
The Academic Senate shall continue to serve as the official voice of the faculties in systemwide
academic and professional matters (the Constitution of the Academic Senate CSUC, Article 1,
Section 1 a.).
In respect to systemwide governance, the Academic Senate endorses the following Principle:
A. Criteria and standards to be used for the appointment, promotion, evaluation, and tenure of
academic employees shall be the joint responsibility of the Academic Senate and the Board of
Trustees of The California State University and Colleges (HEERA, Section 3562 r.). (Criteria and
standards determined jointly by the Academic Senate CSUC and the Board of Trustees shall be
considered minimal; campus senates/councils may recommend additional criteria and
standards.)
B. The Academic Senate of the California State University and Colleges shall be consulted on the
creation of systemwide and intersegmental committees, conferences, or task forces designed
to deal with educational, professional, or academically-related fiscal matters, including the
charge and composition of such bodies. The Academic Senate shall be responsible for the
selection of faculty representatives to serve on or participate in such bodies.
C. The Academic Senate of The California State University and Colleges shall be the formal
policy-recommending body on general, systemwide policy decisions related to the following
matters:
1. minimum admission requirements for students;
2. minimum conditions for the award of certificates and degrees to
students;
3. curricula and research programs;
4. minimum criteria and standards to be used for programs designed to enhance and
maintain professional competence, including the awarding of academic leaves;
5. systemwide aspects of academic planning.
D. The Academic Senate of The California State University and Colleges shall be consulted on
the following:

48

1. systemwide aspects of program review;
2. systemwide aspects of the basic direction of academic support programs;
3. systemwide policies governing the appointment and review of presidents and
academic administrators;
4. policies governing the appointment and review of systemwide executive officers and
academic administrators.
The Academic Senate of The California State University and Colleges shall not participate in the
process of collective bargaining. Normally, matters affecting wages, hours of employment, and
other terms and conditions of employment shall not be considered by the Academic Senate.
The Academic Senate shall endeavor to ensure that educational and professional matters do
not become subjects of bargaining.
IV. Campus Senate/Council Participation in Governance
The Academic Senate of The California State University and Colleges shall have no authority
over those matters delegated to the individual campuses by the Chancellor or by the Board of
Trustees of The California State University and Colleges. Furthermore, nothing in this document
shall be construed to impair the right of academic senates and councils of the several campuses
to communicate through appropriate channels with the Chancellor and the Board of Trustees,
nor to diminish the authority of the campuses and their senates in campus matters of
academic/professional criteria and standards.
Because joint decision-making and consultation between administrators and faculty is essential
to the performance of the educational missions of The California State University and Colleges,
the academic senates/councils of the campuses shall be the primary consultative bodies
regarding educational and professional matters delegated to the individual campuses by the
Chancellor or by the Board of Trustees of The California State University and Colleges and shall
be consulted on fiscal matters which affect the instructional program.
In respect to campus governance, the CSUC Academic Senate endorses the following
Principles:
A. Responsibility shall be vested in the faculty or its elected senate/council
representatives for:
1. Approval of degree candidates;
2. Development of policies governing the awarding of grades.

49

B. Through the campus academic senates/councils responsibility shall be vested in the faculty
or its elected senate/council representatives for developing policies and making
recommendations to the campus presidents on the following matters:
1. criteria and standards for the appointment, retention, awarding of tenure, promotion
and evaluation of academic employees including preservation of the principle of peer
evaluation and provision for the direct involvement of appropriate faculty in these
decisions;
2. determination of membership in the General Faculty;
3. curricular policies, such as admission and degree requirements,
approval of new courses and programs, discontinuance of
academic programs, and academic standards;
4. faculty appointments to institutional task forces, advisory
committees, and auxiliary organizations;
5. academic standards and academic policies governing athletics.
C. The academic senates/councils shall be the primary source of policy- recommendations to
the campus president on decisions related to the following matters:
1. establishment of campus-wide committees on academic or professional matters;
2. the academic role of the library;
3. academic awards, prizes, and scholarships;
4. the academic conduct of students and means for handling infractions;
5. development of institutional missions and goals.
D. The academic senates/councils shall be consulted by the campus presidents concerning:
1. the academic calendar and policies governing the scheduling of classes;
2. policies governing the appointment and review of academic administrators.
E. This outline of functions and responsibilities is intended to provide the essentials for a
satisfactory system of shared governance but should not necessarily be viewed as a
comprehensive enumeration of such functions and responsibilities.

50

FAM 404.35
BYLAWS OF THE FACULTY SENATE
FAM 404.35 Faculty Senate Bylaws
ARTICLE I – COMMITTEES
Faculty Senate committees are responsible to the Faculty Senate and shall report directly to
that body, except on matters otherwise specified. Their duties shall be to make
recommendations on matters of policy and to take action consistent with policy previously
adopted by the Faculty Senate. The chairs of the Educational Policy and Resources Committee
and Faculty Affairs Committee shall be elected from among the tenured faculty membership of
the Faculty Senate. These chairs shall be nominated by the Executive Committee of the Faculty
Senate and shall be elected by the Faculty Senate. Other committees shall elect their own
chairs from among the faculty on the committee. Faculty Senate standing committees will
produce minutes or a summary for each committee meeting. Whenever feasible or appropriate,
other Faculty Senate committees will produce minutes or a summary for each meeting. All
Faculty Senate committees will submit a year-end summary report to the Senate through
the Senate Chair and Executive Committee.
Section 1 Regulations Governing Standing Committees
A. Unless otherwise specified in these Bylaws, the President/designee shall, where
appropriate, select one non-voting representative to membership on standing
committees.
B. Standing committees may appoint subcommittees for special projects.
Subcommittees may be comprised of members from the committee or other faculty.
Standing committees may invite administrators or other faculty to serve as resource
persons for specific issues. Terms for subcommittee appointments shall not exceed two
academic years unless approved by the Executive Committee. Appointees, the Faculty
Executive Committee, and the Faculty Senate Office shall be notified in writing by the
chair of the committee regarding appointments.
C. Elected committee members shall serve for two-year terms, with one-half of the
membership being elected each year. Alternate members are permitted only when
explicitly provided for in the Bylaws. Proxy voting shall not be permitted.
D. Student representatives to standing committees shall be appointed by the Associated
Students Incorporated for a one-year term.

51

E. Standing committees established in the Bylaws shall function through the last day of
the academic year, at which time the newly elected committees shall assume their
responsibilities.
F. Standing committees may consult with other standing committees as appropriate.
Section 2 Standing Committees of the Faculty Senate
A. Curriculum
1. Membership: One tenured representative elected from each constituent unit, one non-voting
student representative, and one non-voting administrative representative. Normally, the
administrative representative would come from the Office of Academic Programs. The student
representative must be an upper division or graduate student who has completed two or more
terms at the University. College representatives to the University Curriculum Committee shall
also be ex-officio voting members of their respective college curriculum committees. The
committee shall elect a chair from among the faculty on the committee.
2. Duties: This committee shall review all curriculum proposals, including experimental courses.
It shall approve student proposals for undergraduate special majors and proposals for special
master’s programs. It shall review credential programs, graduate degrees and other
post-baccalaureate programs and curriculum. It shall be responsible for implementing campus
policy on course deletion. The committee may consult with the Deans of Graduate and
Undergraduate Studies as appropriate.
Curriculum proposals which the committee judges to require additional faculty, staff, equipment,
facilities, or financial resources shall be referred to the Educational Policy and Resources
Committee for its recommendation.
Committee recommendations concerning program proposals shall be forwarded to the Faculty
Senate.
B. Educational Policy and Resources
1. Membership: A tenured chair elected by the Faculty Senate, one tenured representative
elected from each constituent unit, one non-voting student representative, and one non-voting
administrative representative. Normally, the administrative representative would come from the
Office of Academic Programs. The student representative must have completed two or more
terms at the University. The chair shall serve as a member of the Executive Committee. The
committee may designate subcommittees as appropriate, for example to review ancillary units
and programs.
2. Duties: This committee shall evaluate, initiate and review educational policies and plans. The
committee shall familiarize itself with the budget process, be informed of budget allocations at
the

52

divisional level, and make budget recommendations to the President or designee. The
committee shall review and recommend annually policies regarding the allocation of educational
resources. The committee shall also act as a consultative body in matters regarding facilities
planning. All recommendations shall be made to and approved by the Faculty Senate.
The committee shall participate in the development of the academic master plan; and review
and develop criteria for the adoption, modification or termination of courses and programs (e.g.,
majors, minors, credential programs, options, tracks, concentrations, emphases, general
education, continuing education, and other self-supporting programs such as institutes and
centers). It shall review and initiate recommendations concerning grading standards and
practices, admissions policies, academic disqualification and probation, each annual academic
calendar, and non-traditional modes of instruction (e.g., credit by examination, credit for prior
experience, advanced placement, media-based instruction, internships, computer-assisted
instruction).
When appropriate, this committee shall meet with the Dean of the College of Extended and
Global Education and/or with extension program coordinators to originate and review proposals
for courses, programs, conferences, etc., and to initiate and review policy recommendations
affecting the College of Extended and Global Education (e.g., extension, summer session, open
university, and other related matters). Curriculum recommendations of the committee dealing
with degree applicable items shall be sent to the Curriculum Committee. The committee shall
act for the Senate in a review of all non-credit Extension courses and programs not subject to
specific departmental/school approval, and shall review all Extended Education and Global
Education policies.
This committee shall review all Faculty Senate approved documents that originated from or
were reviewed by this committee that have substantive modifications proposed by Academic
Affairs, the President, or any other non-Faculty Senate entity subsequent to Faculty Senate
approval. Upon review of the proposed modifications, this committee shall provide the Executive
Committee a statement of approval or disapproval of the proposed modifications, or an
alternative modification.
C. Faculty Affairs
1. Membership: A tenured chair elected by the Faculty Senate, one tenured representative
elected from each constituent unit, and one non-voting administrative representative. Normally,
the administrative representative would come from the Office of Faculty Affairs and
Development. The chair shall serve as a member of the Executive Committee.
2. Duties: This committee shall review, formulate and recommend policies governing all matters
related to Faculty Affairs to include evaluations, leaves, professional development, and other
related matters.
This committee shall review all Faculty Senate approved documents that originated from or
were reviewed by this committee that have substantive modifications proposed by Academic

53

Affairs, the President, or any other non-Faculty Senate entity subsequent to Faculty Senate
approval. Upon review of the proposed modifications, this committee shall provide the Executive
Committee a statement of approval or disapproval of the proposed modifications, or an
alternative modification.
D. General Education
1. Membership: One tenured representative elected from each constituent unit, one non-voting
student representative, the non-voting faculty General Education Director (appointed by the
Provost), and one non-voting administrative
representative. Normally, the administrative representative would come from the Office of
Undergraduate Studies or the Office of Academic Programs.
2. Duties: This committee shall review all proposed changes in the general education curriculum
and make recommendations to the Curriculum Committee.
It shall review all general education course proposals in terms of how well they meet the
objectives and appropriate criteria for particular subject areas, including state and campus
requirements.
It shall begin a regular five-year cyclical review of the general education program, reviewing
evidence of student learning outcomes over a four-year cycle and a review of the overall
program in the fifth year. It shall evaluate the organization, courses and criteria for each
category being reviewed, and propose adjustments or changes that are deemed necessary to
preserve the consistency, quality and coherence of the overall program.
It shall monitor the number of GE courses approved by any of the colleges. It shall use the
number of existing courses from a specific college in a particular category or section as a factor
when considering additional course proposals from that college. It shall monitor existing courses
to see that they are offered at least once every other year.
It shall convene the Faculty in regularly scheduled forums addressed to improvement of the
general educational curriculum.
Curriculum proposals which the committee judges to require additional faculty, staff, equipment,
facilities, or financial resources shall be referred to the Educational Policy and Resources
Committee for its recommendation.
E. Library
1. Membership: One representative elected from each constituent unit, one non-voting student
representative, and one non-voting administrative representative. Normally, the administrative
representative would come from the University Library.
2. Duties: The committee shall review and recommend allocation of educational resources
within the library.

54

Section 3 Regulations Governing Special and Ad Hoc Committees
A. Each ad hoc committee shall serve until its specified task or tasks have been completed
and/or the committee has been discharged by the Senate. Each special committee shall be
established on a continuing basis.
B. When appropriate, the President/designee shall select one or more representatives to
membership on special or ad hoc committees. The number of positions to be appointed by the
President/designee shall be specified by the appropriate Senate policy document.
C. Ad hoc committee members shall serve until the committee is discharged. Special committee
members (except student representatives) shall serve for two-year terms, with one-half of the
membership being replaced each year. Alternate members are permitted only when explicitly
provided for in the controlling policy documents. Proxy voting shall not be permitted.
D. Student representatives shall be appointed by the Associated Students Incorporated. Student
representatives on special committees shall serve for one-year terms.
E. Special committees shall function through the last day of the academic year, at which time
new committee members shall assume their responsibilities. As special and ad hoc committees
go in and out of business from time to time, the Faculty Senate Office shall maintain a current
and complete listing. Special and Ad Hoc Committees are listed in the Committee Book on the
Faculty Senate Website.
____________________________________________________________________________
ARTICLE II - PROCEDURES FOR NOMINATION AND ELECTION TO THE FACULTY
SENATE, UNIVERSITY-WIDE SENATE OFFICES, THE STATE-WIDE ACADEMIC
SENATE, AND COLLEGE/CONSTITUENT UNIT SENATE OFFICES
Section 1
Candidates shall be nominated and elected in a process which permits participation by every
eligible member of the electorate.
Section 2
A. Elections and referenda shall be conducted utilizing a process that ensures
anonymity.
B. In nominating and electing representatives to the Faculty Senate, and constituent unit
representatives to standing committees and other Senate offices, procedures shall follow
other guidelines of this Article except as mentioned. Department or school elections
should also follow the procedures outlined in this Article unless the department or school
unanimously agrees to an alternate procedure.
C. Nominations and elections for alternates to the Faculty Senate shall run concurrently
with nominations and elections to the Faculty Senate. The alternate position shall be

55

filled by the person receiving the next highest vote total, as determined by the
procedures in Article III, section 3G, after the senate positions are filled.
D. Confirmation elections for Evaluation (RPT) committees or other prescribed offices
shall provide the choice of “acceptable” or “unacceptable,”
E. Nominations and elections from the Faculty at-large shall precede those from the
constituent units.
F. Elections shall begin with a call for nominations eight weeks prior to the last day of
classes in the spring semester. Elections may occur at other times during the academic
year to fill vacant positions.
Section 3
For elections and referenda involving the Faculty at-large and for College/Constituent Unit
Senate offices, the following procedures shall apply:
A. The Senate Elections Committee shall be responsible for University-wide elections
and referenda, and College Elections Officers/Committees shall be responsible for
overseeing college/constituent unit elections, including department/school elections.
B. NOMINATIONS, NOTIFICATION, AND AUTOMATIC ELECTION
The Elections Committee/Officers shall publish to the Faculty a Call for Nominations for each
election. This shall include:
1. the post(s) to be filled by the election along with the number of vacancies;
2. the term(s) of the respective post(s);
3.the eligibility requirement(s) to be met by the nominee(s);
4. the list(s) of those eligible to be nominated.
5. the nominating procedures and deadline for nominations, including the process to
follow to allow for self-nominations.
6. A complete timeline of the election process, including the deadlines for nominations,
notification of nominees, and voting as outlined below.
The Call for Nominations shall be published at least ten (10) academic days before the
deadline for nominations. The Elections Committee/Officers shall notify the electorate of
all nominees three (3) academic days before nominations close. The deadline to submit
votes shall be at least six (6) academic days after the distribution of ballots to the
electorate has been completed.
If nominations close with fewer than, or equal to the minimum sufficient nominees
required to fill the open position(s), that person or those persons shall be automatically
elected without confirmation vote except in the case of Evaluation (RPT) committees. In
order to fill any vacancies that remain open once the deadline for nominations has been
closed, the nomination deadline will be extended until the minimum number of nominees
required to fill the remaining open positions is found.

56

A statement shall be included as follows: Any eligible voter who fails to receive a
nominating petition or a ballot or voting instructions may obtain either from the Faculty
Senate Office or appropriate Elections Committee/Officer on the day of the appropriate
deadline or the academic day immediately prior.
C. ELIGIBILITY LISTS
The Senate support staff shall maintain a current list of those Faculty members who meet the
Constitutional requirements) for election to the post(s) in question. This information shall be
compiled by the Senate support staff from a master list of Faculty, which is maintained in the
Senate Office and published by the Office of Faculty Affairs and Development. The Elections
Committee/Officers shall request verification of their respective lists from their School Deans,
Department Chairs/School Directors, or other appropriate officials. The Elections
Committee/Officers shall publish this list accompanied by this statement:
Any questions about eligibility for nomination in this election must be presented to the Elections
Committee/Officer no later than three (3) academic days after the Call for Nominations and
resolved by that Committee/Officer no later than five (5) academic days after the question has
been received.
D. SUBMISSION OF NOMINATIONS
It shall be the responsibility of those submitting nominations to make sure that the Elections
Committee/Officer or Senate Secretary receives the nominations on time.
All nominees are encouraged to provide a statement of qualifications, limited to no more than
100 words, which when provided, will be placed on the ballot.
The nominee’s acceptance of the nomination should be verified by the Elections Officer.
Upon request, a dated receipt of nomination shall be issued by either a Member of the Elections
Committee, the Elections Officer, or designated representative (e.g., the Faculty Senate support
staff). In the absence of such receipt, the Elections Committee/Officer shall not be considered
responsible if a name is omitted from the ballot because the nomination was misplaced, and the
failure of the name to appear on the ballot shall not be considered grounds for invalidating the
election.
E. CONTENT OF BALLOT
Each ballot shall:
1. state the post(s) at stake in the election and the term(s) of office;
2. list the qualified nominees, with any qualifications that they have provided, in a
randomized order;
3. instruct the voter to complete the ballot indicating:

57

their 1st choice (most preferred) candidate;
their 2nd choice candidate;
their 3rd choice candidate; and so on until ALL candidates have been ranked;
4. state how the ballot may be cast and the deadline for casting ballots;
5. describe the procedure by which confidentiality is assured; and
6. remind the voter that failure to follow the instructions may invalidate the ballot.
F. PROCEDURE FOR DISTRIBUTION AND RETURN OF BALLOTS
The Senate support staff or Elections Committee/Officer shall send the ballot (or instructions for
how to access the ballot if the election is conducted electronically) to each eligible voter at least
six (6) academic days before the deadline for casting ballots.
G. DETERMINATION OF RESULTS
The applicable Senate Elections Committee/Elections Officer shall verify the names of those
who voted against the list of eligible voters.
As soon as reasonably possible after the deadline for casting ballots, the Elections
Committee/Officer shall tally the ballots. In the case of university-wide elections, the Chair of the
Elections Committee and the Senate support staff or one additional elections officer shall tally
the ballots. In the case of college or constituent unit elections, the Elections Officer and one
other member of the constituent unit shall tally the ballots.
If a member of the Elections Committee or an Elections Officer is a candidate for an office
covered by that balloting, they shall be excused from such counting and replaced by an
appropriate substitute.
All necessary documentation and/or data, including the checklist of those who voted and the
record of each vote, shall be stored in a secure location for at least ten (10) academic days after
the results of the election are announced. If at the end of ten days the announced results have
not been officially appealed, the materials may be discarded. Otherwise, these must be saved
as evidence until the appeal has been settled by the procedures outlined below (Section J).
The procedure for determining the results of the election shall be as follows:
(1) If the vote is for a single candidate:
(a) If any candidate is the first choice on a majority of ballots, that candidate is declared elected.
If there is no first-choice majority candidate,
(b) the candidate with the smallest number of first choice votes is eliminated, and the ballots on
which that candidate was the first choice are distributed, according to the voters' second
choices, among the candidates remaining. If there is now a majority for one candidate, that
person is declared elected.
Otherwise,

58

(c) the candidate with fewest votes is eliminated and those ballots redistributed according to the
voters' highest remaining choices.
This process is continued until a majority for one candidate is obtained, at which point that
candidate is declared elected.
(d) If it becomes necessary to eliminate a candidate, and there is a tie as to who has the fewest
votes, a random choice procedure will be used to determine which candidate is eliminated prior
to the next count. The same procedure shall be used for any and all ties that may occur when
determining the results.
(2) If the vote is to elect two or more candidates:
One candidate will be elected as in Part (1). Subsequent candidates will be elected as follows:
(a) the ballots will be distributed according to the voters' first choices.
(b) Those ballots whose first-choice votes are for the candidate that has already been elected
are redistributed among the remaining candidates according to the voters' second choices.
If at this stage any candidate has a majority of the votes, he or she is declared elected. If not,
the candidate with the fewest votes is eliminated and their ballots redistributed according to the
voters' highest remaining choices.
(c) The redistribution process is continued, as in the election of a single candidate, until a
majority for one candidate is obtained, at which point that candidate is declared elected.
(d) Ties are dealt with as in part (a) above.
(e) The process is repeated until the desired number of candidates are elected.
(f) In elections for members of the Faculty Senate, the alternate shall be elected after Senators
are elected.
(3) Invalid Ballots: Ballots shall be invalidated and set aside for any of the following reasons:
(a) failure to authenticate the voter as part of a constituency;
(b) two or more ballots submitted from the same voter;
(c) illegible or indeterminable preferences on ballot.
H. ANNOUNCEMENT OF ELECTION RESULTS
As soon as the ballots have been tallied, the Elections Committee/Officer shall make the results
of the election known to the Faculty.

59

I. ELECTIONS QUESTIONS
If at any time in the election process any Faculty member(s) have a question about the election
concerning implementation or interpretation of Article II of these bylaws of the Constitution, they
shall put the question in writing to the Elections Committee for decision. The Faculty member(s)
may appeal this decision to the Executive Committee whose rulings shall be final.
J. APPEAL OF ELECTION RESULTS
The announced results of any campus-wide or college/constituent unit election may be
appealed within the first eight (8) academic days after said results are announced. Appeal shall
be by petition, signed by ten (10) faculty members or five (5) in the case of college/constituent
unit elections, and delivered to the Elections Committee/Officer or the Senate support staff as
appropriate. The appeal shall state the grounds for questioning the announced election results.
The merits of any appeal for university-wide or college/constituent unit elections shall be judged
as soon as possible by an Election Appeal Board consisting of the Executive Committee of the
Faculty Senate. The Election Appeal Board may subpoena relevant materials and take
testimony as it sees fit.
The proceedings of the Election Appeal Board shall be open only to members of the Board
itself, the Senate support staff, and those whom the Board calls for testimony.
Based on its findings, the Appeal Board may:
1. Reject the appeal, or
2. Accept the appeal, and based on this acceptance, invalidate the announced election
results and order the election process rerun from whatever point they see fit.
The decision of the Election Appeal Board shall be final.
____________________________________________________________________________
ARTICLE III - RESIGNATIONS AND RECALL ELECTIONS
Section 1
Any Faculty Senator, State-wide Academic Senator or Faculty Senate committee member
who is going on full-time leave for more than one academic term shall vacate their position
at the beginning of the academic year in which the leave will occur. Should the notice of leave
occur during the operative year, then they should vacate the position immediately. When the
office is ordinarily filled by an election or appointment, a new election shall be held or an
appointment made, respectively, to fill the unexpired term of office.
Section 2
Any Faculty Senator, State-wide Academic Senator or Faculty Senate committee member
who cannot fulfill their membership responsibilities, especially with regard to attendance to

60

meetings, must resign so that the affected constituency may be properly represented. New
elections shall be held or appointments made to fill the unexpired term of office. If an elected
body loses a faculty member and has ten weeks or less of business remaining for that
academic year, then the Executive Committee shall appoint a replacement.
Section 3
If a Faculty Senator or State-wide Academic Senator fails to resign or reassume their
responsibilities under suggestion by the Senate Chair, the Senate, by majority vote, may refer
the matter to the Elections Committee. The Elections Committee shall have ten (10) academic
days after receiving the complaint to investigate and seek a mutually satisfactory solution to
the complaint. If none is found, the Committee will issue a report, with copies to the Senate
and the Senator under investigation. If the Elections Committee's findings uphold the Senate's
complaint, it shall then immediately initiate a recall election. The recall ballot shall include a
summary of the findings of the Elections Committee and will include a statement in rebuttal
from the Senator subject to recall if they so desire.
Section 4
If a committee member fails to resign or reassume their responsibilities under suggestion by
the committee chair, the committee, by majority vote, may refer the matter to the Elections
Committee. The Elections Committee shall have ten (10) academic days after receiving the
committee complaint to investigate and seek a mutually satisfactory solution to the complaint.
If none is found, the Committee will issue a report, with copies to the Senate, committee chair,
and the committee member under investigation. If the Elections Committee's findings uphold
the committee's complaint, it shall then immediately initiate a recall election. The recall ballot
shall include a summary of the findings of the Elections Committee and will include a
statement in rebuttal from the committee member subject to recall if they desire. The
electorate for Executive Committee appointments shall be the Executive Committee. The
Senate shall be the electorate for positions elected or confirmed by the Faculty Senate.
________________________________________________________________
ARTICLE IV - REPRESENTATIVES TO THE ACADEMIC SENATE OF THE
CALIFORNIA STATE UNIVERSITY
The representatives to the Academic Senate of the California State University shall regularly
consult with, report to, and where appropriate, receive instruction from the Faculty Senate
concerning matters and issues before that State-wide body.
________________________________________________________________
ARTICLE V - QUORUM

61

In all meetings of the Faculty and of the Faculty Senate, a quorum shall consist of the
presence of a majority of the voting members.
___________________________________________________________
ARTICLE VI – RE-AFFIRMING A FACULTY APPROVED ACTION ITEM THAT HAS NOT
BEEN SIGNED BY THE PRESIDENT
The Faculty Senate may choose to register its disapproval of the failure of the President to
sign any action item that has been approved by the Faculty Senate. A re-affirmation vote may
be held for any action item that is not signed by the University President within 60 calendar
days of its passage by the Faculty Senate. A re-affirmation vote may be requested by any
Senator. The re-affirmation vote shall be a two-reading item and a majority vote is required for
passage.
___________________________________________________________
ARTICLE VII - PARLIAMENTARY AUTHORITY
To the extent that it does not conflict with the Constitution and Bylaws of the CSUSB Faculty,
Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised will be the final source of parliamentary authority. In
the event of conflict, the Constitution and Bylaws take precedence.

FAM 404.36
FACULTY SENATE CONSTITUTION
FAM 404.36 Faculty Senate Constitutuion
ARTICLE I -- THE FACULTY
Section 1. Membership and Voting
A. The membership of the faculty shall be as follows but shall not include
Management Personnel Plan administrators with retreat rights either for purposes
of voting or for other faculty rights unless expressly permitted in the Constitution or
Bylaws:
Professor
Associate Professor Associate
Assistant Professor
Qualified Lecturer*

Librarian
Librarian
Senior Assistant Librarian
Assistant Librarian

Student Services Professionals-

62

Academic Related
*Qualified lecturers include (a) those with a full-time annual or multi-year contract,
and (b) those with both a multi-year appointment and an annual time base greater
than or equal to 0.75. Time base eligibility in departmental elections shall be based
on annual entitlement in that department. Time base eligibility in college elections
shall be based on annual entitlement in that college. Time base eligibility in
university-wide elections shall be based on total annual entitlement. Eligibility shall
not change during the course of an academic year. Non-tenure-line Librarians and
Student Services Professionals - Academic Related are also deemed qualified if
their appointments meet these criteria.
B. Those named in subsection A shall have the power to vote in general faculty
meetings, in faculty referenda, and in elections for representatives to the Statewide
Academic Senate, to the Faculty Senate of the University, to standing committees
of the Faculty Senate, and to school and department committees; but with the
following exceptions:
1. Only tenure-line faculty may vote for representatives to faculty recruitment
committees or to evaluation committees or any other panels so specified
by the Collective Bargaining Agreement.
2. Management Personnel Plan (MPP) faculty shall forfeit all
Senate-sanctioned voting rights as herein defined until such time as they
return to the tenure-line ranks.
3. Additional restrictions may be placed on voter eligibility in the Bylaws of
the Faculty Senate or in policy documents establishing special
committees.
C. Faculty on paid leave shall retain all powers to vote.
D. Faculty participating in the Faculty Early Retirement Program (FERP) shall retain
all powers to vote.
Section 2. Powers
A. The Faculty shall have the power to formulate, adopt, review and revise
recommendations relating to the policies and operation of the University, subject to
the laws of the State of California, the regulations of the Trustees of the California
State University, and the Collective Bargaining Agreement.
B. The Faculty shall normally exercise its powers through the Faculty Senate of the
University elected by, and representative of, the Faculty and subject to its review.
C. Faculty or Faculty Senate approved policies shall become University policy after
adoption by the University President.

63

Section 3. Officers
The officers of the Faculty shall be the President of the University or designee and the
Chair of the Faculty Senate or designee.
Section 4. General Faculty Meetings and Duties of Faculty Officers
A. The President or designee shall call at least one faculty meeting during the
academic year and may call special meetings whenever necessary. At these
meetings the President or designee shall preside.
B. The Chair of the Faculty Senate shall call a meeting of the Faculty whenever a
majority of the total membership of the Faculty Senate so requests. At such
meetings the Chair of the Faculty Senate shall preside.
C. The Chair of the Faculty Senate shall call a meeting of the Faculty whenever it is
requested by a petition of ten percent of the Faculty. At such meetings the Chair
of the Faculty Senate shall preside unless the Faculty elects to choose a chair pro
tem. The chair pro tem shall be elected by a majority of those present.
____________________________________________________________________________

ARTICLE II -- THE FACULTY SENATE
Section 1. Membership
Section 2. Powers
Section 3. Duties
Section 4. Officers
Section 5. Term of Service and Recall
Section 6. Agenda
Section 7. Meetings
Section 8. Duration of a Faculty Senate
Section 1. Membership
The Faculty Senate shall consist of the members described below.
A. Faculty shall elect representatives from the following units:
1. The Jack H. Brown College of Business and Public Administration
2. College of Education
3. College of Arts and Letters
4. College of Natural Sciences
5. College of Social and Behavioral Sciences
6. Library
7. Student Services Professionals - Academic Related
64

One senate position shall be allocated to each of these units, and the number of
additional senate positions for each unit shall be determined by the following formula: the
number of faculty in that unit times 25 divided by the total number of faculty in all seven
units. The numbers used in the formula shall include only tenure-line faculty for each of
the five colleges and shall include both tenure-line faculty and qualified lecturers, as
defined in Article I, Section 1, Subsection A, for the Library and Student Services
Professionals - Academic Related. If the decimal part of the number resulting from this
formula is greater than or equal to 0.5, the number shall be raised to the next highest
integer, otherwise the decimal part shall be dropped.
The senators for each unit shall be elected by and from the faculty of that unit. For the
five colleges, only tenure-line faculty are eligible to vote for and serve in these positions.
For the librarians and student services professionals - academic related, both tenure-line
faculty and qualified lecturers, as defined in Article I, Section 1, Subsection A, are eligible
to vote for and serve in these positions.
This formula shall be implemented during the fall semester prior to electing Faculty
Senators in the Spring. The Faculty Senators so elected shall serve their entire terms
regardless of any change in number of faculty in any of the units during the course of the
academic year. If any unit is scheduled to gain or lose more than one senate seat in a
given academic year, it shall gain or lose only one seat per year until compliance with this
formula is achieved.
B. One lecturer representative from each of the five colleges shall be elected during
the regular Spring election cycle by and from qualified lecturers, as defined in
Article I Section 1, Subsection A, in that college.
C. The constituencies specified in sections A and B shall each elect one alternate
per constituency using the procedures specified in the Bylaws. The alternate shall
have full voting rights in the absence of a duly elected senator. If a vacant senate
seat opens up, the alternate shall fill the remainder of the resigning senator’s term.
D. Ex-officio members shall consist of the following:
1. The President of the University, who shall not vote.
2. The Vice President for Academic Affairs/Provost, who shall not vote.
3. Delegates to the Academic Senate of the California State University, who
by election to that body become voting members of the Faculty Senate.
4. The Associated Students President, or designee approved by the AS
Executive Cabinet for the academic year, who shall be a voting member.
E. Only tenure-line Faculty may serve on the Statewide Academic Senate.

65

F. Management Personnel Plan Faculty may not serve as elected Faculty
representatives to the Statewide Academic Senate, to the Faculty Senate, or to any
committee at any level established under Senate policy.
Section 2. Powers
The Faculty Senate shall be the delegate assembly of the Faculty through which the
Faculty shall normally exercise its powers. All members of the Faculty have the right to
attend meetings of the Faculty Senate and may speak with the consent of the Chair of
the Faculty Senate, but they shall not vote. Other persons may attend at the discretion of
the Faculty Senate. The Faculty Senate, upon a majority vote of the voting members
present, may declare an executive session. Any action taken by the Faculty Senate is
subject to review by the Faculty and must be reviewed whenever the Faculty so requests
by a petition of fifteen percent of its members. The Faculty by vote of a majority of its total
membership may modify or nullify decisions of the Faculty Senate.
Section 3. Duties
A. The Faculty Senate shall perform all duties consistent with the formulation,
adoption, review and revision of recommendations relating to the policies and
operation of the University, within the limits prescribed by this Constitution.
B. The Faculty Senate shall create committees necessary to the performance of its
duties. Regulations and specific charges for these committees shall also be
established by the Faculty Senate.
C. The Faculty Senate, by vote of a majority of its total voting membership, shall
adopt all bylaws necessary to the performance of its duties and amend them when
necessary. Changes in the bylaws shall not be proposed and voted upon at the
same meeting.
D. The Faculty Senate shall keep a record of its proceedings and shall distribute
copies of minutes to the Faculty and to the appropriate administrative officers of
the University.
E. The Faculty Senate shall establish appropriate procedures for implementation of
approved policies consistent with regulations of the Trustees of the California State
University.
Section 4. Officers
A. The officers of the Faculty Senate shall include a Chair, a Vice Chair, and an
Executive Secretary, all to be elected by and from the voting membership of the
Faculty Senate. They shall each serve for a one-year term.

66

B. A Faculty Senate officer may be removed from office by a vote of two-thirds of the
total voting membership of the Senate.
Section 5. Term of Service and Recall
A. Term of Service
Members shall serve for a term of two years (with the exception of the Statewide
Academic Senators who are elected for three-year terms, and lecturer
representatives who are elected for one-year terms), with terms so arranged that
one-half of the Faculty Senate shall be elected each year.
B. Recall
1. Any Faculty Senator, Statewide Academic Senator or Faculty Senate standing,
special, or ad hoc committee member shall be subjected to a recall election by
submission of a petition signed by 25 percent of their electorate. Alternatively, a
recall election may be initiated by the Elections Committee, after an investigation
requested by a majority vote of the Senate or of the affected Senate committee.
2. A member of the Faculty Senate, the Statewide Academic Senate or Faculty
Senate standing, special, or ad hoc committee is recalled by a two-thirds vote of
their electorate.
3. For recall purposes, the Faculty Senate shall serve as the "electorate" of Faculty
Senate special or ad hoc committee members elected by the Faculty Senate, and
the Executive Committee shall serve as the "electorate" of committee members
appointed by the Executive Committee.
Section 6. Agenda
Any Faculty Senate committee or member of the Faculty may transmit to the Faculty
Senate Executive Committee topics for discussion and proposals for possible action
which are within the jurisdiction of the Faculty Senate at least ten working days before the
regularly scheduled meeting of the Faculty Senate. The established agenda shall be
circulated among the Faculty at least three days prior to the meeting of the Faculty
Senate.
All business left unfinished at the end of an academic year shall carry over to the next
academic year in the same procedural posture that it had at the end of the preceding
year.
Section 7. Meetings
The Executive Committee of the Faculty Senate shall call regularly scheduled meetings

67

of the Faculty Senate at least once a month during the academic year and special
meetings whenever necessary. A regularly scheduled meeting may be canceled for lack of
agenda.
Section 8. Duration of a Faculty Senate
Each Faculty Senate shall serve for one year. The currently seated Faculty Senate shall
serve until the last day of the current academic year. However, at the last two regularly
scheduled meetings of the academic year, the incoming Faculty Senate for the following
academic year shall be seated solely for the purpose of necessary elections. Officers,
at-large Executive Committee members, elections officers, and statewide Academic
Senate Alternates shall be elected at the next- to-last Senate meeting. If these elections
are not completed at the next-to-last Senate meeting, they may be elected at the last
Senate meeting. The chairs of the Educational Policy and Resources Committee and the
Faculty Affairs Committee shall be elected at the last Senate meeting.

ARTICLE III -- COMMITTEES OF THE FACULTY SENATE
_________________________________________________________
Faculty Senate committees shall make recommendations to the Faculty Senate regarding
matters of policy, within the limits prescribed for them by the Faculty Senate and by this
Constitution and its Bylaws. All committees shall report regularly to the Faculty Senate
concerning committee activities.
Section 1. Standing Committees
Section 2. The Executive Committee
Section 3. The Elections Committee
Section 4. Special and Ad Hoc Committees
Section 1. Standing Committees
A. Standing Committees established in the Constitution shall be elected by the Faculty
Senate, with one person coming from each Constituent Unit. Representatives to other
standing committees shall be elected by Constituent Units, one representative per area
elected by the faculty of that area. Provisions may also be made for one or more
administrative representatives per committee and for one or more student
representatives per committee. The following shall be the Constituent Units for committee
representation:
1. The Jack H. Brown College of Business and Public Administration
2. College of Education
3. College of Arts and Letters and Library
4. College of Natural Sciences

68

5. College of Social and Behavioral Sciences, and Student Services Professionals –
Academic Related.
B. The Executive Committee and the Elections Committee shall be the sole standing
committees established in this Constitution. Other standing committees shall be
established in the Bylaws of this Constitution.
Section 2. The Executive Committee
A. Membership: The Executive Committee shall consist of the Chair, Vice Chair, and
Executive Secretary of the Faculty Senate, two other members of the Faculty
Senate who shall serve at-large, Statewide Senators, and the President or
designee. Neither the President nor designee shall be voting members. Each
elected member of the Executive Committee shall be from a different Constituent Unit. The
order for electing members of the Executive Committee shall be Chair,
Vice Chair, Executive Secretary, and Members At-Large. In addition, the Chair of
the Educational Policies and Resources Committee and the Chair of the Faculty
Affairs Committee shall be members of the Executive Committee. Elected
Executive Committee members, including the Chairs of the Faculty Affairs
Committee and the Educational Policy and Resources Committee, are elected by
and from the elected members of the Faculty Senate.
B. Duties:
1. The Executive Committee shall prepare the agenda for and schedule the meetings
of the Faculty Senate.
2. The Executive Committee shall refer to relevant committees those issues that it
deems suitably significant from whatever source; however, the Executive
Committee may re-refer an item back to the committee only once after the first
assignment to said body. Following final receipt of referred or re-referred items
from relevant committees, the Executive Committee shall forward said items to the
Senate as a whole for consideration.
3. The Executive Committee shall interpret the meaning and intent of all articles of
the Constitution and Bylaws except as specified in Article II, Section 3, Part J of
the Bylaws.
4. The Executive Committee shall make appropriate nominations and appointments
to campus committees when necessary.
5. Other duties of the Executive Committee shall include, but are not limited to, acting
on behalf of the Faculty Senate when the Senate is not meeting regularly, such as
in the summer.

69

Section 3. The Elections Committee
A. Membership: The Vice Chair of the Faculty Senate shall serve as the Chair of the
Elections Committee and be the representative of their unit (College, Library, or
Student Services Professionals – Academic Related). The Faculty Senate shall
elect one representative from each remaining unit (College/Library/Student
Services Professionals – Academic Related).
B. Duties: The Elections Committee shall administer all provisions of Articles II and III
of the Bylaws.
Section 4. Special and Ad Hoc Committees
The Senate may establish Special and Ad Hoc Committees to serve special needs at the
University. These shall be established in Senate policy documents in conformance with
procedures established in the Bylaws. Faculty representation shall normally be by
Constituent Unit. There may also be at large faculty representatives and representatives
from other areas of the campus community.

ARTICLE IV -- ADOPTION OF THIS CONSTITUTION
_________________________________________________________
Approval by a majority vote of the Faculty, as defined in Article 1, Section 1, shall be
necessary for the adoption of this Constitution.

ARTICLE V -- REVISION OF THIS CONSTITUTION
_________________________________________________________
An Ad Hoc Committee on constitutional revision shall be convened at least every five
years after the adoption of this Constitution to ensure that this Constitution is sufficient to
the needs of the University.
A. Membership: One representative from each constituent unit, elected by the Faculty
Senate and one member designated by the University President.
B. Duties: This committee shall initiate and review proposals for revision of the
Constitution and Bylaws of the Faculty Senate and make appropriate
recommendations to the Senate.

ARTICLE VI -- INITIATION OF AND APPROVAL OF AMENDMENTS
_________________________________________________________
70

Section 1. Initiation of a Referendum
Section 2. Approval of Amendments
Section 1. Initiation of a Referendum
A. The Faculty Senate, by majority vote, may initiate a referendum of the Faculty on
proposed amendments to the Constitution.
B. A referendum on amendments to this Constitution may also be initiated by a
petition of twenty percent of the Faculty.
Section 2. Approval of Amendments
Ratification of proposed amendments to this constitution shall require a two-thirds
affirmative vote of all valid ballots cast. The ratification election shall be conducted by the
Elections Committee. All members of the faculty, except faculty on full-time leave of
absence without pay, shall be eligible to vote. A copy of proposed amendments shall be
sent to every faculty member at least one week before ballots are distributed. A minimum
of ten working days shall be provided from the day that ballots are distributed to the
deadline for receiving ballots in the Senate Office.

FAM 404.37
FAM STRUCTURE AND FORMAT GUIDELINES
FAM 404.37 Structure and Format Guidelines
Purpose and Scope
Policies listed in the University's Faculty Administrative Manual (FAM) play a critical role in the
governance-and is a representation-of the university. In order to achieve clarity of content
and consistency of format, this policy sets forth the guidelines for the macrostructure and
format of all FAM policies documents.
Policy Statement
A FAM policy is required to:
1. Be consistent with other, existing FAMs in content and terminology.
2. Conform to the structure and format as specified herein.
3. Comply with the American Disability Act (ADA).

71

To ensure the meeting of these aims:
4. The originator of a policy-be it a senate committee or an administrative office-must
draft the document strictly according to the guidelines herein set forth.
5. The senate approval process shall include scrutiny of adherence of these guidelines.
6. A deviation from the guidelines herein specified shall result in the policy not being
listed on the senate website and not being implemented.
Process of Following FAM Guidelines
1. For policy writers
a. Read this policy.
b. Obtain the FAM Format Template document from the Senate office.
c. Using the template to draft the policy.
2. For the Senate Executive Committee (EC)
a. When a policy is presented to the EC for approval, make sure the document is
written in accordance with the guidelines before placing it on the senate meeting
agenda.
b. If the document deviates from the guidelines but it must go into the approval
process due to well-justified time pressure, inform the writer that the deviations
must be addressed by the time for second reading.
3. For the senate
a. The senate process shall include the adherence of the document to the guidelines.
b. The senate shall not approve a policy in the second reading if it contains any
deviation from these guidelines.
4. For the senate office
a. Provide information required by each document, including but not limited to:
i. Dates of approval in the Approvals section (see below).
ii. Information required in the History section.
iii. Any other information on documentation that might be needed.
b. Make sure the document is ADA-compliant before listing it on the senate website.
c. List signed policies on the website, with the first page on the university's letterhead.
d. Keep a detailed log of policies that have reached the senate office.
Guidelines
1. Terminology consistency
a. Consistency with other FAMs: The terms used in a new FAM policy must be
consistent with existing FAMs. This necessitates that the writer read those other
FAMs that are related to the one being drafted. The following terms have already

72

been defined and can be used without further defining:
i. Tenure-line faculty: Both probationary and tenured.
ii. Lecturers: Non-tenure-line faculty.
iii. Assistant Professor, Associate Professor, Professor: The three ranks for
tenure-line faculty. Note that Full Professor is not used.
iv. Semester: A regular academic term, to be distinguished from Winter Term
(Session) and Summer Term (Session).
b. Consistency in typology and word order: A term should be spelled out the same way
throughout a document. The title of the Provost, for instance, should always be
Provost and Vice President for Academic Affairs, not Provost/Vice President for
Academic Affairs, Provost and VPAA, Vice President for Academic Affairs and
Provost, or Provost.
c. Achieving consistency through defining: The policy writer can also define terms. In
many existing FAMs, for example, the term department is defined to mean both a
department and school; the term chair to mean both a department chair and school
director.
What an acronym stands for must be spelled out in full when it first appears or be
defined in the Definition section. After that, the acronym, not the full term, must be
used throughout.
2. Structure
a. All policy documents must contain the following sections.
i. Purpose and Scope
ii. Policy Statement
iii. Approval
iv. History
b. A policy can include as many other sections as needed, e.g.
i. Definition
ii. Process and Procedures
iii. Committee
3. Format
a. Do not format manually. In order to achieve compliance with ADA, automatic
formatting as titles, headers, and lists must be used. This document is formatted in that
way.
b. Normal text must be Calibri font, 12-point, 1.15 line spacing.
c. The FAM Format Template has spaces included after paragraphs so that no more
spacing is needed.
d. The beginning of a paragraph must not be indented.

73

e. No underlining should be used other than for links. Italics may be used for emphasis
if needed.
f. Links should be live. They should be displayed as a feature of the text, and not
displayed as a url. Example: FAM Format Template.
g. All text should be black except for links and email addresses.
h. Headings may have no more than 3 levels, using:
i. First tier: Numbers
ii. Second tier: lower case letters
iii. Third tier: small roman numerals
The first two levels (1, 2, 3 and a, b, c) are 0.25 inch indented from the previous
level, with 0.25 hanging indent. The third level (i, ii, iii) is 0.5 inch indented from
the previous level, with 0.5 hanging indent.
i. The dates displayed in the Approvals section should be the dates the document
was signed by the relevant signees. The document (referred to as For Office Use
Only below) with the actual signatures will be kept in the Faculty Senate office.
j. A Table of Contents must be created for a FAM document that is over 3 pages.
It should be created automatically, and updated as the document is updated.
This will create links to sections of the document.

FAM 500.8
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY POLICY
FAM 500.8 Intellectual Property Policy

Historical Background
In November of 1993, the Copyright Compliance Committee (now the University
Copyright/Fair Use Committee) was formed when the division Vice Presidents and
college Deans named representatives to the committee. This Committee was charged
with creating campus policies on the issues of copyright and intellectual property. The
document was revised in February of 2001. This document, the third to be produced by
this committee, serves as the Intellectual Property Policy of the CSUSB (California State
University, San Bernardino) campus community.
1. Purpose
The purpose of this document is to state the CSUSB (hereafter referred to as the
University) policy regarding ownership and technology transfer (commercialization) of
intellectual property as it pertains to the University and its constituents (faculty, staff,
administrators, and students, including employees of the University Enterprises
Corporation (UEC)). This policy acknowledges that issues of intellectual property are
complex and that individual circumstances may affect establishment of ownership.
74

Three factors have been identified by the Consortium for Educational Technology for
University Systems (C.E.T.U.S.) as important for determining ownership: creation,
control, and compensation. This policy provides a framework for assigning ownership in
situations where intellectual property rights would not reside solely with the creator. This
policy is consistent with existing law and collective bargaining provisions and will be reexamined periodically and revised by the University as necessary.
2. General Policy on Intellectual Property Rights
Our first principle is that works produced by faculty at CSUSB in the course of normal
faculty bargaining unit work remain the intellectual property of faculty and will not be
considered work-for-hire. Normal work is defined by the bargaining agreement. These
works may be copyrightable or patentable, and include, but are not limited to, scholarly
papers, works of art, syllabi, course contents and material. This policy does not
diminish the right and obligation of faculty members to disseminate the results of
research and creative activity for scholarly purposes. The University does not claim
ownership of books, articles, course materials, and similar works that disseminate
research and scholarly results or works derived from preparation for classroom
teaching; nor does the University claim ownership of popular nonfiction, fiction, poetry,
musical compositions or other works of artistic imagination, which are not institutional
works. A faculty member’s general obligation to produce scholarly works does not
constitute a basis for University interest. Unless there is a specific assignment (see
Section 3), content of on-line courses also belongs to the faculty.
Faculty may enter into an agreement with the University to use their copyrighted course
materials in future courses and for use by other faculty.
Thus, intellectual property rights for works produced under normal faculty bargaining
unit work assignment will reside solely with the creator of the work except in specific
Circumstances:
1) where the creator has been given a specific assignment to develop work beyond
normal work expectations,
2) where the university has provided to the creator extraordinary support or
compensation, and
3) where the UEC and an outside sponsor enter into agreement (grant, contract,
cooperative agreement) to carry out research or other creative activity involving faculty,
staff or students. In these cases, intellectual property may be solely owned by the

75

University or jointly owned by both parties as specified in an agreement reached before
the project work is begun. Definitions and guidelines for these three circumstances are
described below.
3. Specific Assignments
Specific assignment refers to work produced by a faculty member who is paid by the
University to produce that particular work and for which facilities and compensation are
provided beyond those provided to other faculty members in the course of their normal
duties. In these cases, copyrights or patents may be owned by CSUSB or jointly owned
with the faculty member. In cases of specific assignments, ownership of intellectual
property rights shall be determined before the work begins and documented in a
standard Intellectual Property Rights agreement form. This agreement will be completed
and filed with the Associate Provost for Research before work begins.
4. Extraordinary Support or Compensation
The words “extraordinary support or compensation” refer to support provided for the
creative efforts that represent resources beyond those available to members of the
University community in the course of performing their normal work. The following examples
are usually not considered products of extraordinary support or
Compensation:
- Use of university office space, laboratory space, studio space, university
computers and networks, library materials,
- Works resulting from reassigned time, mini-grants, summer research
fellowships, TRC grants, sabbatical and difference in pay leaves,
- Use of clerical of technical staff.
All affected parties are advised to consider the matter of copyright ownership before
work begins or before extraordinary support is provided and to develop a written
agreement. All affected parties should disclose potential products of the work before
the negotiation of a contract. The rationale for this advisement is to avoid disputes over
ownership at a later date.
5. Sponsored Programs
When there is a sponsored program funded by an external sponsor (grant, contract,

76

cooperative agreement) involving faculty, staff or students, the University (UEC, faculty,
staff and students) must comply with the conditions of the agreement regarding
ownership, protection and licensing of any intellectual property resulting from the
research or creative activity. Unless otherwise stated in the agreement with the
sponsor, the intellectual property resulting from sponsored activities will be owned by
the originator of the intellectual property.
Federal government sponsors, under the Bayh-Dole Act, would generally assign
ownership of an invention to the recipient of the award (UEC), with typical requirements
of federal agency disclosure of such inventions, and occasional requirements of public
sharing of publications resulting from such support. The intellectual and creative
endeavors of faculty and staff will be recognized and rewarded through development of
a memorandum of understanding in the event of commercialization of the intellectual
Property.
In general, philanthropic gifts are not sponsored programs. In the case of a
philanthropic gift, the wishes of the donor will be followed. If the gift is unrestricted, the
general conditions of this Intellectual Property policy will be followed.
6. University Ownership and Joint Ownership of Copyright/Patent
In cases where the university is the sole or joint owner of works created at CSUSB, the
individual designated by the university to negotiate intellectual property rights with
creators will develop a written agreement with the creator(s) of the work the possibility
of licensing certain rights to the creator, including, but not limited to, a determination of
the distribution of royalties and other compensation. As suggested by C.E.T.U.S.,
examples may include:
- The right to make reproductions of the work to use in teaching, scholarship,
and research;
- the right to make derivative works, such as translations, videotaped versions,
film scripts, etc.
If the University, by either written policy or specific act, chooses not to act upon the right
of intellectual property licensure or patent or similar methodology for assertion of rights
within two years after disclosing the intellectual property, ownership passes wholly to
the inventor or creator.

77

7. Administrator, Staff, and Student Rights
This policy also applies to works created by administrators, staff, and students when
done so under the conditions described above in this policy.
In the case of student research, either undergraduate or graduate, the copyright to
completed works resides with the creator, the student. In the case of faculty-student
research projects it is recommended that the parties develop a written agreement
describing shared rights when work is begun, when possible, but before work is
Completed.
In the case of work done by students for the university using university data or
equipment, parties will discuss shared rights when work is begun (or as soon as
possible into the project) and an Intellectual Property Rights Agreement form will be
completed and filed per Section 3 above.
IMPLEMENTATION
8. Procedures
The University will disclose this policy via a posting on the Faculty Senate Policies Web
page. The Office of the Provost, through the Associate Provost for Research, and in
coordination with the UEC if appropriate, shall implement and administer this policy,
including negotiation of intellectual property terms in agreements with sponsors,
evaluation of patentability or other forms of intellectual property protection, filing for
patents, negotiation of use rights, and the pursuit of infringement actions. The Office of
Academic Research will develop a web-site with materials to assist faculty, staff and
students during the technology transfer/commercialization process. The web-site will
include information on copyright procedures, Disclosure of Inventions, an Intellectual
Property Rights Agreement and information on patents and licensing of inventions.
9. University Commercialization Committee
The purpose of the University Commercialization Committee is to handle
inventions/creations in which the intellectual property was developed as a special
assignment or extraordinary support and therefore is owned by the University (see
Sections 2-5). If the intellectual property is owned by the creator, as in the normal
course of work duties (see section 2 and 7), the creator may ask the University to assist

78

with commercialization of the invention/creation, for example, to develop a provisional or
full patent and/or license. In this case the University Commercialization Committee will
determine whether to proceed with this specific invention/creation. In order to pursue
commercialization of the invention/creation (patent, license, trademark), it will be
necessary to assign the intellectual property rights to the University with specification of
royalty distributions paid to the inventor/creator determined in a written mutual
agreement. If the University Commercialization Committee chooses not to act in
support of the commercialization, the inventor/creator retains all rights of ownership and
commercialization of the intellectual property.
The University Commercialization Committee will be composed by Associate Provost
for Research, ex officio (Chair), the Executive Director of the UEC, ex officio, and three
Faculty appointed by Senate Executive Committee. The faculty appointees would serve
3-year revolving appointments (one faculty member replaced each year). The
committee will review intellectual property to determine whether the University shall
commercialize the invention/creative work through a patent, copyright, and/or license
agreement. The Committee may solicit advice/analysis regarding the technology from
outside individuals. The inventor/creator must be present at the meeting in which their
invention/creation is discussed and must be allowed to speak on their own behalf. In
making its assessment, the Committee will rely on information provided by both the
inventor/creator and the University. Committee deliberations will be in closed session to
protect proprietary information. Similarly, committee records will be kept confidential and
committee members will sign a Non-Disclosure Agreement. If the University, by either
written policy or specific act, chooses not to act upon the right of intellectual property
licensure or patent or similar methodology for assertion of rights, ownership passes
wholly to the inventor or creator.
When necessary, the Committee shall review invention disclosures and other
information to evaluate the University’s contribution to the development of particular
intellectual properties. In many cases the inventor/creator will reach an agreement with
the University concerning ownership rights and equity interest without the need for
review by the Committee. The purpose of the review will be to help the parties reach
agreement within the framework of this policy. The final resolution of any disagreement
concerning the application or interpretation of this policy will be governed by applicable
law and collective bargaining agreements.
DEFINITIONS

79

10. Creator
The creator(s) is the author(s), inventor(s) or developer(s) who puts the intellectual
property material into a fixed tangible medium of expression. The creator may also
have originated the intellectual property material.
11. Intellectual Property
"Intellectual property" means inventions, discoveries, innovations, and copyrightable
works. There are four ways to protect intellectual property patents, trademarks, copyrights or trade secrets. "Inventions," "discoveries," or
“innovations" include tangible or intangible inventions, whether or not reduced to
practice and tangible research products whether or not patentable or copyrightable.
Such research products include, for example: computer programs, integrated circuit
designs, industrial designs, databases, technical drawings, biological materials, and
other technical creations. These materials include scholarly and literary works, creative
and artistic works, software, data and databases, multimedia works, electronic media
and communications, and as otherwise defined by federal law. Certain discoveries and
inventions, including trade secrets and know-how, may not be patentable but may have
material commercial value or potential as revenue producers. These accomplishments
are subject to the same policy as any patentable invention.
12. Invention
Any art or process (way of doing or making things), machine, manufacture, design, or
composition of matter, or any new and useful improvement thereof, or any variety of
plant, which is or may be patentable under the patent laws of the United States.
13. Copyright
Copyright is a form of statutory protection granted to the developer of certain types of
works fixed in a tangible medium of expression as an incentive for that creator and/or
author to disseminate the work to the public. The copyright owner holds a set of
exclusive rights: the right to make reproductions of the work; the right to distribute
copies of it; the right to make derivative works that borrow substantially from an existing
copyrighted work; and the right to make public performances or displays of most works.
Copyright is applicable to computer software, artwork, music, articles, books, and other
literary works. Copyright protects the expression of the idea but not the idea itself.
Registration of a copyrightable work creates additional protection and is sometimes

80

advisable. Registration is accomplished by completing the necessary forms and filing
them with the U.S. Copyright Office in Washington, D.C.
14. Patents
The Patent Act of 1952 gives inventors the right to exclude others from making, selling
or offering for sale, or using their inventions for a specified length of time in exchange
for full disclosure of their patented inventions. This bargain serves to promote the
progress of science and useful arts specified in the Constitution. Patents must be
applied for with the Patent and Trademark Office. Patents may be granted to
applicant(s), including faculty, staff, administrator or student, who “invent or discover
any new and useful process, machine, manufacture, or composition of matter, or any
new and useful improvements thereof.” Applications must be filed by or on behalf of the
person or entity who is claiming ownership of the potential patent. The term of a new
patent is 20 years from the date on which the application for the patent was filed in the
United States or, in special cases, from the date an earlier related application was filed,
subject to the payment of maintenance fees. US patent grants are effective only within
the US, US territories, and US possessions.
15. Software
The proprietary protection available for software is unique in that both copyright and
patent are available. Copyright protection may cover the expression of the software
ideas in a tangible medium, while patent protection may cover algorithmic inventions.
16. Trademark
Trade and service marks are distinctive words or graphic symbols. They generally
identify the sources, product, producer, or distributor of goods or services. Symbols and
logos of CSUSB are trademarks and they may not be used by third parties without
proper license and specific approval from the university. Doing so may subject the
unlicensed user to civil and/or criminal penalties. Education Code 89005.5.
17. Trade Secret
Trade secret refers to financial, business, scientific, technical, economic, or engineering
information, including patterns, plans, compilations, program devices, formulas,
designs, prototypes, methods, techniques, processes, procedures, programs or codes,

81

whether tangible or intangible, and whether or how stored, compiled, or memorialized
physically, electronically, graphically, photographically, or in writing if (A) the owner
thereof has taken reasonable measures to keep such information secret; and (B) the
information derives independent economic value, actual or potential, from not being
generally known to, and not being readily ascertainable through proper means by the public.

FAM 540
REPRODUCTION OF COPYRIGHTED MATERIALS
FAM 501.5 Reproduction of Copyright Material

Recent litigation has raised the question of duplicating copyrighted materials, and the
College has sought advice from the Office of General Counsel.
It has been a long-standing and widely practiced custom to permit one copy of a
copyrighted document where this was intended for personal use. Such duplication has
come to be known as the fair use doctrine. Under the fair use doctrine, reproduction of
copyright material for group use, such as a class, is not permitted and requires permission
of the publisher.
The College, therefore, cannot approve requests for single or multiple copy duplication
where this is intended for class use.

FAM 603.4
GUIDELINES AND PROCEDURES ON UNIVERSITY-COMPENSATED FACULTY
ADDITIONAL EMPLOYMENT
FAM 603.4 Compensated Faculty Additional Employment

These guidelines explain and clarify University procedures on university-compensated faculty
additional employment and the reporting of such employment. Additional employment is
defined as "any employment compensated by CSU, funded by the general fund or non-general
funds including CSU auxiliaries, that is in addition to the primary or normal employment of a
82

faculty unit employees." (See Article 36 of the Collective Bargaining Agreement for Unit 3)
Typical examples of additional employment include CSUSB grants and contracts; Extended
Learning appointments; service to other CSU's, the Chancellor’s Office, other State agencies, or
other campus divisions; and any other assignments when funded as additional income as
opposed to assigned time.
1. The additional employment restrictions apply to all academic year and 10-month faculty
members on weekdays and weekends during the academic year covered by the academic
calendar prepared by the Division of Academic Affairs. For full- time 12-month faculty members
such as Chairs, additional employment restrictions are applicable at all times, except for
vacation time.
2. Faculty members are allowed compensation for additional employment totaling an additional
25% of the academic year time base. Using a standard 40-hour week, the 25% percent
maximum would be compensation for 10 hours per week.
3. While the 25% additional employment is computed over the academic year, appropriate
justification should be provided for exceeding the 25% maximum per quarter. All commitments
that exceed the acceptable maximum in a quarter must be recommended by the College Dean
and approved by the Associate Provost for Academic Personnel.
4. Additional employment activities covered by these guidelines can occur through sponsored
program (grant and contract) activity, through services to ExtendedLearning, or through special
assignments for the university, other CSU campuses, or the CSU Chancellor's Office.
Grant and contract authorization is obtained through the normal Sponsored Programs
institutional clearance process. To obtain approval for additional employment not involving a
grant or contract, authorization must be obtained from one's school dean. The Dean will then
notify the Associate Provost for Academic Personnel via memo. (See Attachment A for a sample
notification memo.)
5. As a matter of good practice, faculty compensation for additional employment should be
based upon prevailing rates appropriate to their expertise and professional standing. In
situations where additional employment is to be paid at a rate substantially higher than the
faculty member’s state salary rate, (or, in the circumstance of a fixed price contract where the
hourly rate cannot be known in advance but which may generate a rate substantially higher
than the faculty member’s salary rate), an explanation should be provided at the time the grant
or contract proposal is submitted.

83

6. In computing additional employment hours when teaching degree-applicable lecture or
seminar courses, a minimum of one additional hour for preparation should be added for each
hour the class meets per week. For example, if the lecture or seminar course meets for 4 hours
per week, the number of hours to be reported as additional employment should be 8. In all
other courses or non- teaching instances, the number of additional employment hours reported
should be the actual number of hours spent on the project or assignment.
7. Additional employment for faculty members must be based on or be converted to an hourly
rate. This rate must be clearly indicated on all time sheets or transaction forms authorizing such
compensation.
8. All time sheets for additional employment must be reviewed and signed by the College Dean
before being forwarded to the Foundation or State Payroll Office.
9. The offices of Payroll, Extended Learning, and the Foundation for the CSUSB, shall each
complete a form listing all compensated additional employment hours worked by faculty
members. The form(s) (see Attachment B for a sample) will be in calendar format reflecting the
academic year, 10-month, and 12-month employees covered by these guidelines. Completed
forms shall be submitted to Academic Personnel for compilation and monitoring. The employee
shall also receive a copy of each form. At the end of the academic year, the Associate Provost
for Academic Personnel shall submit a report to the Vice President for Academic Affairs/Provost
on University-Compensated Faculty Additional Employment.

FAM 607.6
POLICY ON NEPOTISM
FAM 607.6 Policy on Nepotism
Purpose and Scope
Relatives of employees may be employed by the University following this policy on nepotism.
Definition
Nepotism: Favoritism shown or patronage granted to relatives, as in business. (From The
American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language, Third Edition)
Relatives are defined as parents and children, spouses and significant others, and siblings.
84

Policy Statement
This policy defines and provides limitations for serving as a judge or advocate involving a
relative.
Procedure and Process
A person may not serve as judge or advocate in any situation involving a relative. Such
situations include but are not limited to:
a. No person may supervise a relative.
b. No person may have fiscal responsibility for a relative.
c. No person may enter into any part of the hiring, retention, promotion, or tenure
discussions of a relative.
d. No person may participate in the judgment of any awards, grants, or
recommendations for leaves, awards, etc., where a relative is involved.
e. Violations of this policy should be reported to the Office of Faculty Affairs and
Development and/or Human Resources for possible investigation.

FAM 612.4
TITLE AND STATUS OF RETIRED INSTRUCTIONAL
FACULTY, LIBRARIANS, AND STUDENT SERVICES
PROFESSIONALS -ACADEMIC RELATED
FAM 612.4 Title and Status of Retired Instructional Faculty, Librarians, and Student Services
Professionals - searchable.pdf

Purpose and Scope
The purpose of this policy is to confer the title and status of "Emeritus" (male), "Emerita"
(female), or "Emeritx" (gender neutral) upon a member of the instructional faculty, faculty
librarian, or a student services professional - academic related who is retiring from service at
the California State University, San Bernardino as a means of expressing appreciation for service
to the institution.

85

Policy Statement
This policy states specific provisions whereby the title and status of Emeritus, Emerita, or
Emeritx may be granted to an instructional faculty member, faculty librarian, or a student
services professional - academic related who is retiring from service at the California State
University, San Bernardino. In all cases, final approval shall be made by the President of the
University.
Eligibility
Only full-time instructional faculty, faculty librarians, or student services professionals academic related who qualify under the following criteria shall be eligible for title and status of
Emeritx, Emerita, or Emeritus.
Criteria
To qualify for the title and status of Emerita, Emeritus, or Emeritx, an instructional faculty
member, faculty librarian, or student services professional academic related shall meet at least
one (1) of the following criteria:
1. Achieved the rank of Professor, Librarian (equivalent to the rank of Professor) or a
level equivalent to Professor as a Student Services Professional - Academic Related and
served for a minimum of seven (7) consecutive years at this campus.
2. The title of Emerita, Emeritus, or Emeritx may be conferred posthumously upon
recommendation by the department chair, college dean, or any other colleague, and
subsequent approval of the President of the University.
3. Under special circumstances, "service with distinction" shall merit this award for
those who have not met the above criteria. This category could include tenure-line
faculty who have not achieved the rank of Professor, long-term lecturers, and their
equivalents among librarians, counselors, and coaches. A retiree who would like to be
considered under this provision should submit a letter to the Faculty Senate Executive
Committee explaining their qualifications. In addition to approval of the President of the
University, approval of the Faculty Affairs Committee and the Provost and Vice
President for Academic Affairs shall also be required.

86

Titles
Upon approval of the status by the President of the University, the retiree may choose to use
the title "Emeritus," "Emerita," or "Emeritx." Retirees may also make the choice of title
retroactively. Retiring and retired faculty should notify the Office of Faculty Affairs and
Development of their choice of title.
1. A member of the instructional faculty who has engaged primarily in teaching or who
has served as an administrator who has exercised retreat rights into an academic
department/school shall be titled, for example, "Professor of Mathematics, Emeritx"
2. A faculty member who holds the rank of Librarian (equivalent to the rank of
Professor) shall be titled, for example, "Librarian Emeritus."
3. A Student Services Professional - Academic Related who qualifies shall be titled, for
example, "Student Services Professional Academic Related, Emerita" or "Counselor
Emerita."
4. If criterion 3 is operative and establishment of "service with distinction" has been
approved, the person involved shall receive the title of the position from which the
person is retiring. An example of this is: "Associate Professor of English, Emeritus."
Status
The status of Emeritx, Emeritus, or Emerita shall be recognized in the following ways:
1. Listing of names, inclusive dates of years of service ending with retirement and title
conferred, shall appear in the University Catalog.
2. Public recognition shall be accorded when appropriate, i.e., a significant scholarly
achievement during retirement. The manner of recognition shall be commensurate with
the significance of the achievement.
3. Appropriate recognition at commencement ceremonies. Announcement of status
shall be made at the commencement exercise immediately following the conferring of
status.
4. Other recognition may be given when deemed appropriate by the President of the
University.

87

Privileges
The status of Emeritus, Emerita, or Emeritx shall carry the following privileges. These are not to
be construed as absolute rights but are merely privileges granted where possible and under all
existing regulations.
1. A faculty member who holds the status of Emeritus, Emerita, or Emeritx and who is
teaching courses on campus shall be accorded all privileges given to full-time faculty.
2. A university identification card with photograph shall be issued which designates the
retiree as a faculty member with emeritus, emerita, or emeritx status.
3. When available, use of campus office facilities including departmental/school
mailbox, campus computer facilities and clerical assistance, when needed for
professional or scholarly pursuit. Such use shall not disrupt the normal operations of the
business of the University.
4. Parking on campus at no cost when space is available. An annual parking decal shall
not be issued. Parking shall be in the visitors’ section of the parking lot unless special
circumstances prevail. To prevent receiving a parking citation, the Office of Public Safety
must be notified when a retiree uses this privilege.
5. As a member of the faculty, library and use of campus recreational facilities shall
continue for the retiree on the same basis as full-time faculty.
6. Invitations may be extended to a retiree for participation in public ceremonies,
commencements, academic processions, convocations, general faculty meetings,
departmental/school meetings, social and cultural events sponsored by the University
or
special events designated by the President of the University.

FAM 625.5
DIFFERENCE IN PAY LEAVES
FAM 625.5 Difference in Pay Leaves

88

For reference to Difference in Pay Leaves, please refer to the current Collective
Bargaining Agreement (CBA) Article 28.

FAM 625.7
FACULTY EARLY RETIREMENT PROGRAM
FAM 625.7 Faculty Early Retirement Program (FERP)
1. Eligible tenured faculty unit employees as defined in article 2.13(d) who have reached the

age of fifty-five (55) may, subject to the conditions following, participate in a Faculty Early
Retirement Program (FERP).
2. An eligible tenured faculty employee, tenured counselor, or tenured librarian shall notify the
President in writing at least six (6) months prior to the beginning of the campus academic year
that s/he opts to participate in the FERP. The President may waive the required notice period
3. The potential participant shall be provided with a FERP appointment letter from the
President. The FERP appointment letter shall indicate the required period of employment as
determined by the President. The employee shall provide to the President a written statement
of acceptance of such a FERP appointment. If the President determines it is necessary, due to
program needs, to alter the period of employment, the President and the participant shall
attempt to reach mutual agreement on an alternative. If mutual agreement is not reached, the
President may alter the period of employment, provided that the participant receives a one
hundred and twenty (120) day notice.
4. Participants in FERP shall have been granted a service retirement. Such service retirement
shall be in accordance with the requirements of PERS and/or STRS.
5. Participation in FERP shall commence at the beginning of the campus academic year. Service
retirement shall begin concurrently with or prior to the beginning of the campus academic year.
6. FERP employment shall be at the same rank, and salary (step) level of the participant in the
academic or fiscal year immediately prior to retirement. Such employment shall be proportional
to the time base of the participant in the academic or fiscal year immediately prior to
retirement. As for other faculty unit employees, the mix of work assignments within the

89

timebase of the appointment is determined pursuant to Article 20 in the Collective Bargaining
Agreement, Workload.
a) An employee who opts to participate in FERP pursuant to 2 above on or after July 1,
2007, and whose participation commences with the beginning of the 2007/08 academic
year or thereafter, shall be entitled to the yearly period of employment for no more
than five (5) consecutive academic or fiscal years.
b) An employee who opts to participate in FERP pursuant to 2 above during the final
year of this agreement shall be entitled to the yearly period of employment for no more
than five (5) consecutive academic or fiscal years.
8. The permissible “period of employment” shall refer to one (1) academic term not to exceed a
total of ninety (90) workdays or fifty (50) percent of the employee’s regular time base in the
year preceding retirement. Calculations of such periods of employment shall include days
worked in summer session/special session or CSU extension that do not coincide with the
period of employment.
9. The permissible “period of employment” for Librarian Faculty Unit Employees shall refer to
full-time employment for a duration not to exceed fifty percent (50%) of the Librarian Faculty
Unit Employee’s work year in the year immediately preceding retirement, or fifty percent (50%)
of the Librarian Faculty Unit Employee’s regular time base in the year immediately preceding
retirement. In either case, the period of FERP employment shall not exceed 960 hours. Any
change in the work schedule of Librarian Faculty Unit Employee in the year preceding entry into
FERP shall require the approval of the President. Calculations of such periods of employment
shall include days worked in summer session/special session or CSU extension that do not
coincide with the period of employment.
10. A participant in FERP on a quarter system campus may request of the President
employment in addition to the one (1) academic term period of employment, provided that
such additional employment does not result in a total period of employment which exceeds the
ninety (90) workday limit pursuant to provision 8 above.
11. The right to continued employment in the FERP pursuant to provision 6 above of this Article
shall terminate in the event of dismissal for cause, layoff, or failure to meet the employment
commitment.

90

12. A participant may request that the time base of the FERP appointment be reduced. The
President shall determine if such a request shall be granted. Such a reduction in time base shall
continue for the duration of the FERP appointment.
13. Participants may be appointed in CSU extension during the period of employment in FERP.
14. Notwithstanding provisions 8, 9, 10 and 13 above , participants shall not be eligible for
other CSU appointments while in the FERP.
15. Effective July 1, 1996, when the DMD salary schedule is eliminated, tenured faculty unit
employees formerly receiving Designated Market Condition Salaries in disciplines designated as
hard-to-hire shall be eligible to opt to participate in FERP pursuant to 2.
16. A participant shall be granted one (1) leave of absence without pay for personal illness for
all or part of the period of employment. Such leaves shall not affect future participation in
FERP.
17. At the time of the service retirement and appointment in FERP, a participant may elect to
carry over up to forty-eight (48) hours of sick leave into the FERP appointment if the participant
elects to reduce his/her accumulated sick leave by that amount for service retirement credit. In
addition to the sick leave carry over, if any, full-time FERP participants shall continue to accrue
eight (8) hours sick leave per qualifying academic pay period or qualifying pay period during the
period of employment. Such accrual shall be pro rata for less than full-time Participants. A
maximum of one hundred and sixty (160) hours of sick leave may be accrued during FERP.
18. A participant shall be required to perform normal responsibilities and his/her share of
normal duties and activities
19. A participant shall, for the period of active employment, be deemed a tenured faculty
employee. Such a participant shall be eligible to serve on governance committees whose
assignments are normally completed during the period of FERP employment.
20. Employees deemed tenured pursuant to 19 shall not be counted against any percentage
limitation on total tenured faculty employment at the department, school/college, campus, or
statewide level.
21. During the period of an employee’s participation in FERP, the CSU shall provide a CSU dental
plan on the same basis as such a plan is provided to faculty unit employees. The provision of

91

such a dental plan shall require that the participant was enrolled in a CSU dental plan
immediately prior to service retirement.
22. The following provisions of the Collective Bargaining Agreement shall not apply to
participants in FERP:
Article 14, Promotion
Article 22, Leaves of Absence Without Pay
Article 24, Sick Leave, 24.1, 24.3, 24.4
Article 27, Sabbatical Leaves
Article 28, Difference in Pay Leave
Article 32, Benefits, 32.1

FAM 626.3
LEAVES OF ABSENCE WITH PAY
FAM 626.3 Leave of Absence with Pay

For reference to Leaves of Absence with Pay, please refer to the current Collective
Bargaining Agreement (CBA) Article 23.

FAM 626.6
POLICY ON USE OF THE PERSONAL HOLIDAY
FAM 626.6 Use of Personal Holiday

1. Members of the faculty bargaining unit shall be entitled to a Personal Holiday which may be
taken on one day during the calendar year. If the faculty bargaining unit employee fails to take
the Personal Holiday before the end of the calendar year, the holiday for that year shall not be
carried forward into the next calendar year.
1.1 The scheduling of the Personal Holiday shall be by mutual agreement of the faculty
bargaining unit employee and her or his immediate supervisor.
1.2 Casual Employment faculty bargaining unit employees are not entitled to a personal
holiday.

92

2. Request for Personal Holiday
2.1 To schedule a Personal Holiday, a memo should be sent to one's immediate
supervisor at least 5 days in advance of the date proposed.That supervisor must agree
to the request before the leave can be effective. Denial of a request shall be in writing
and must specify the reason for the decision. The fact that the requested day is one on
which the faculty member has direct instructional responsibility shall not be sufficient
reason for denial.
2.2 The immediate supervisor may exercise discretion and agree to schedule personal
holidays in situations where the possibility of a 5- day notice is precluded. Such
situations may include the use of this holiday as sick leave for faculty who have not yet
acquired sick leave or have exhausted it, for faculty who may be unable to reach campus
because of unusual circumstances such as car break-down or severe weather conditions,
or similar situations of an emergency nature.

FAM 626.8
PRE-RETIREMENT REDUCTION IN TIME BASE
FAM 626.8 Pre-Retirement Reduction in Timebase

Article 30
30.1 The Pre-Retirement Reduction in Time Base (PRTB) shall be available to tenured faculty
unit employees who have reached the age of fifty-five (55) years subject to the following
conditions:
a. That such a tenured faculty unit employee requests entry into PRTB at least six (6)
months prior to the beginning of the fiscal year of academic year in which he/she
desires to participate in PRTB. The President may waive the required request time limits.
b. That such a tenured faculty unit employee shall not have reached the age of sixty-five
(65) at the time of requested entry into PRTB; or, if a member of STRS, such an
employee shall not have reached the age of sixty-four (64) at the time of requested
entry into PRTB.

93

c. That such a request is granted by the President. The President shall respond to such a
request no later than sixty (60) days after receipt of such a request.
d. That the President shall provide the potential participant in PRTB with an
appointment letter which shall indicate the terms of the reduction in time base. The
faculty unit employee shall provide the President with a written statement of
acceptance of the reduction in time base.
30.2 The PRTB shall provide a reduction in time base to an average of two-thirds (2/3), one-half
(1/2), or one-third (1/3) of full time for a maximum period of five (5) consecutive years.
30.3 Faculty unit employees requesting to participate in PRTB shall have been employed in the
CSU for at least ten (10) years at full time. The five (5) years immediately preceding the
effective date of the PRTB shall have been continuous full-time employment.
30.4 Entry into PRTB may be implemented at the beginning of an academic year or, when
appropriate, at the beginning of the fiscal year.
30.5 The time base of a participant shall be reduced to the requested two-thirds (2/3), one-half
(1/2), or one-third (1/3) for the academic year or fiscal year.
30.6 PERS and STRS deductions shall be based upon the full-time rate of pay. The CSU and the
employee shall pay their respective shares. For OASDI, the rate shall be on the actual amount of
remuneration.
30.7 Health, dental and other appropriate benefits available to full-time faculty unit employees
shall be available on the same basis to PRTB participants.
30.8 PRTB participants shall not be eligible for sabbatical leaves or leaves with pay.
30.9 Sick leave shall be accrued by participants in PRTB on a pro rata basis.
30.10 The time base of a PRTB participant shall be considered full time for the purpose of
restrictions on additional employment as provided in Article 36, Additional Employment.
30.11 Once a faculty unit employee is authorized to participate in PRTB, the faculty unit
employee may not revoke the reduced time base and return to full-time employment unless
approved by the President. Further, this provision shall apply if a PRTB participant completes
the maximum five (5) years and does not elect a service retirement.

94

30.12 A participant's appropriate annual salary shall be paid in twelve (12) equal payments. If a
participant fails to meet his/her employment commitment, salary adjustments or repayment by
the participant of an overpayment may be required. Such an adjustment or required repayment
shall not be the basis of a grievance.
30.13 A participant shall be required to perform normal responsibilities, duties, and activities
pro rata.

FAM 626.35
FACULTY LEAVES OF ABSENCE WITHOUT PAY
FAM 626.35 Faculty Leaves of Absence Without Pay

Table of Contents
Purpose and Scope
Policy Statement
Procedures and Process
Report on professional Leaves
Approvals
History
Purpose and Scope
This policy statement contains provisions whereby Faculty Unit Employees may apply for and
be granted a leave of absence without pay. It does not cover faculty buyout with either internal
or external funds, as such buyout is not considered a leave. In the case of disagreement
between this policy and the Collective Bargaining Agreement (CBA), the CBA shall prevail.
Definition
1. Appropriate Committee: The committee created to approve applications for leave
without pay at the level of the applicant's work unit, which varies depending on the type
of faculty: instructional faculty, library faculty, coaching faculty, or Student Service
Personnel, Academic Related (SSPAR).
2. Department Chair: Department chair or school director for instructional faculty.
3. Supervisor: The immediate supervisor for non-instructional faculty.
4. Appropriate administrator: The administrator above department chair/supervisor.

95

5. FUE: Full-time Faculty Unit Employee.
Policy Statement
This policy lists the types of leaves, eligibility, time periods for leaves, application process, and
approval process.
Procedures and Process
1. Eligibility: FUEs or less than full-time tenured faculty unit employees shall be eligible
for a leave of absence without pay.
2. Period of Leave: A leave may be granted for a period of one {1} or more semesters for
up to two (2) years. Under special circumstances, up to one {1} year extension may be
Granted.
3. Types of Leaves
a. Personal Leaves: These may be granted for reasons such as unpaid sick leave,
outside employment, parental leave, family care leave, or other purposes of a
personal nature.
b. Professional Leaves: These may be granted for reasons such as research,
advanced
study, professional development or other purposes providing a direct benefit to
the University.
4. Application
An application for a leave without pay or an extension thereof shall be in writing on a standard
application form found on the Faculty Affairs and Development website
(https://www.csusb.edu/faculty-affairs-development/docs-forms/leaveforms). The application should include the reason for and the requested length of the leave and
be submitted to the department chair/supervisor as early as circumstances permit.
5. Notification of Decision
The appropriate administrator shall respond in writing to applicants indicating reasons
for approval or denial.

96

6. General provisions
a. A FUE on leave for more than fifteen (15} working days may opt to continue any
health or dental benefits at his/her own expense.
b. A FUE on leave is advised to check with PERS as to the effect the leave has on
retirement status.
c. A FUE shall notify the appropriate administrator in writing of his/her intention to
return to service to the University. For leaves of only one (1) semester, this must be
done in a timely manner. For leaves of more than one (1) semester, the following
deadlines must be met.
i. Return at the beginning of the Fall Semester - preceding April 1.
ii. Return at the beginning of the Spring Semester - preceding October 1
d. FUEs on full-time leave without pay for one semester or more, shall vacate any position on
the Faculty Senate, Statewide Academic Senate or Faculty Senate Committee.
e. A FUE on leave shall not return to active pay status prior to the expiration date of such leave
unless written approval has been given by the appropriate administrator.
7. Specific provisions for personal leaves
a. Except in cases of family care or medical leave, FUEs on a personal leave without pay
shall not accrue service credit toward probation, sabbatical eligibility, difference-in-pay
eligibility, Service Salary Step Increase (5551} eligibility, or seniority.
b. A probationary faculty unit employee on a personal leave without pay of more than
two consecutive semesters will not be subject to mandatory performance
review/periodic evaluation.
8. Specific provisions for professional leaves
a. Applications are reviewed by the appropriate Department/School/Library/SSP,
AR/Coach Leave Committee in consultation with the department chair/ appropriate
supervisor. See FAM 627 .65 (Sabbatical Leaves} for a description of the Professional
Leave Committee composition and selection. Recommendations are forwarded to the

97

College Dean / University Librarian / Vice President for Student Affairs/ Vice President
for University Advancement (hereinafter referred to as the appropriate administrator}.
The recommendation to the appropriate administrator shall include a statement
regarding the merits or the purpose of the leave and the effect the leave may have upon
the affected division. In deciding whether to approve or deny the leave, the appropriate
administrator shall consider the department/school or equivalent unit's department's
recommendations, the programmatic needs of the college / library / respective
department of the SSP,AR / Athletics program and campus budget implications.
b. FUE on a professional leave without pay shall accrue service credit toward
probationary and sabbatical eligibility, difference-in-pay eligibility, Service Salary
Increase (SSI} eligibility, and seniority.
c. A probationary faculty unit employee on a professional leave without pay who
is due to undergo performance review during the period of the leave will still be
responsible for submitting a Faculty Activities Report and proceeding with the
regularly scheduled review.
A probationary faculty unit employee on a professional leave without pay who is due to
undergo periodic evaluation during the period of the leave will have the option of either
submitting a Faculty Activities Report and proceeding with the evaluation or skipping
the review for that cycle.
A tenured faculty unit employee on a professional leave without pay who is scheduled
for a periodic evaluation during the period of the leave will have the option of
postponing the evaluation until the following academic year.
d. Accrual of service credit toward sabbatical eligibility shall be for a maximum of
one (1) year per sabbatical eligibility period. Accrual of service toward probation
shall be for a maximum of one (1) year.
e. Accrual of service credit toward SSI eligibility shall be for a maximum of one
(1) year per professional leave regardless of length or extension thereof.
Report on Professional Leaves
1. A FUE on leave for professional purposes shall, within 30 days upon return, submit to
the Dean or appropriate administrator a written report describing the activities and

98

accomplishments during the period of the leave. This report shall accompany
subsequent application(s) for leave without pay.
2. If the appropriate committee determines that the purpose and any conditions of the
leave were not met, it shall, in consultation with the department chair/supervisor,
recommend to the appropriate administrator that the accrual of service credit as noted
above shall be forfeited.

FAM 627.2
POLICY AND PROCEDURES FOR
THE REIMBURSEMENT OF FACULTY RELEASE TIME
FAM 627.2 Policy and Procedures for Reimbursement of Faculty Release Time

(1) It is the policy of the university to seek full salary and benefit reimbursement for all faculty
release time. Reimbursement at any other rate is considered cost-sharing, and should be
reviewed and approved by the chair/director, and dean according to guidelines established by
the Division of Academic Affairs.
(2) Upon notification that funding for the reimbursement for the release from all or part of a
faculty members teaching assignments has been awarded, it is the responsibility of the project
director/principal investigator to notify the affected college dean(s) and department
hair/school director(s) of the pending funded release(s).
(3) The college dean, in collaboration with the faculty member and the Foundation Office will
prepare and complete a Grant/Contract Fund Transfer Approval Form in order to initiate the
contract for the release and the timely transfer of funds from the foundation to the university.

FAM 627.5
RESIGNATION
FAM 627.5 Resignation

Faculty members who wish to resign their appointments or who wish to decline reappointment
should inform the College President according to the following schedule: Assistant Professors
by March 15; Associate Professors or Professors by February 15. A waiver of these deadline
requirements may be requested in cases of hardship or where a faculty member would
otherwise be denied substantial professional advancement.
99

FAM 627.65
SABBATICAL LEAVES
FAM 627.65 Sabbatical Leaves

Purpose
This policy governs all aspects of sabbatical leave by full‐time faculty. It is based on the relevant
article of the Collective Bargaining Agreement (CBA). Should there be found an inconsistency
between the two documents, the CBA shall prevail.

Definitions
1. Full‐time faculty: All full‐time unit‐three employees of the university: instructional
faculty, library faculty, coaching faculty, and Student Service Professionals, Academic
Related (SSPARs).
2. Department: Department or school.
3. Department Chair: Department Chair or School director

Policy Statement
A sabbatical leave shall support activities that benefit the University, such as research, scholarly
and creative activity, instructional improvement or retraining.
The length of a sabbatical leave can be either one (1) or two (2) semesters for academic year
faculty; four (4) or eight (8) months for 12‐month faculty.

Eligibility
A full‐time faculty member shall be eligible for a sabbatical leave after six (6) years of full‐time
service in the preceding seven (7) years and at least six (6) years since the last sabbatical leave
or difference‐in‐pay leave.
Service credit granted to probationary faculty at the time of appointment shall also apply
towards the eligibility requirements for a sabbatical leave.

100

A leave of absence without pay or service in an administrative appointment excluded from the
bargaining unit shall not constitute a break in service for eligibility requirements.

Application Process and Response Deadlines
The Office of Faculty Affairs and Development will notify all eligible faculty.
The applicant shall submit an application for a sabbatical leave. The application shall include a
statement of the purpose of the sabbatical, a description of the proposed project and the
CSUSB resources, if any, necessary to carry it out, and a statement of the time requested, which
shall not exceed one (1) year. Application and response deadlines shall be established by the
President or designee after considering recommendations from the Professional Leave
Committees. Applicants should include copies of previous sabbatical reports (where
applicable).

Criteria for Approval
Criteria for the evaluation and approval of proposals) are:
1. Relationship to the educational aims and purposes of the applicant’s department,
college, library, or unit.
2. Intellectual development of the applicant through research, scholarly and creative
activities, instructional improvement, or faculty retraining.
3. Quality of the proposal in terms of clarity, purpose, methods, and objectives.
4. Effects on programmatic needs of the department, college, or library.
5. Completion of previous sabbatical reports, if applicable.
6. Length of time since the last sabbatical will be taken into consideration.
Periods of Leave and Salary
The salary of academic‐year faculty on a sabbatical leave is determined as follows:
1. One (1) semester at full salary.
2. Two (2) semesters at one‐half (1⁄2) of full salary.
The salary of 12‐month faculty on sabbatical leave shall be determined as follows:
1. Four (4)) months at full salary.

101

2. Eight (8) months at one‐half (1/2) of full salary.
The start date of a sabbatical for a 12‐month faculty with instructional responsibilities shall
coincide with the start date of the academic term.
Faculty serving as department chairs shall be assigned to the equivalent 12‐month or academic
year instructional faculty classification for the duration of the sabbatical, and will not receive
the department chair stipend while on sabbatical leave.
If the leave‐taking faculty occupies a split position with both academic year and 12‐month
components, the higher appointment time base will normally be used to establish whether the
faculty member is placed into an academic year position or a 12‐month position for the
duration of the sabbatical. Upon request of the faculty and approval of the appropriate
administrator, a split position whose majority appointment is on a 12‐month basis may be
assigned to an academic year position for the duration of the sabbatical.

Exception.
A sabbatical of two (2) semesters may be implemented within a two (2) consecutive year
period, subject to the recommendations of the Professional Leave Committee, the approval of
the appropriate administrator, and the approval of the President or designee.

Conditions
Faculty on sabbatical leave shall be considered in work status and shall receive health, dental,
and appropriate fringe benefits in the same manner as if s/he were not on sabbatical leave.
Faculty on sabbatical leave shall be entitled to accrue sick leave, vacation, and service credit
toward merit salary adjustment eligibility, eligibility toward promotion, if applicable and
seniority credit.
Faculty on sabbatical leave shall not accept additional and/or outside employment without
prior approval of the President or designee.
Faculty on sabbatical leave may be required by the President or designee to provide verification
that the conditions of the leave were met. The statement of verification shall be provided to
the President or designee and the Professional Leave Committee.

102

Faculty on sabbatical leave shall render service to the University upon return from a sabbatical
leave at the rate of one (1) term of service for each term of leave.

Application Process
1. A departmental Professional Leave Committee shall review sabbatical applications based on
the Criteria for Approval as listed above. The Professional Leave Committee shall consist of
three tenured faculty members elected by the tenure‐line members of the department for a
one‐year term. Faculty applying for a sabbatical leave shall not be eligible for election to the
Professional Leave Committee. A department may designate an existing departmental
committee to fill this role if these conditions are met. The recommendation of the Professional
Leave Committee shall be sent to the college dean or appropriate administrator and to the
applicant. The applicant may submit a response to the college dean within 10 academic days.
2. A copy of the application shall be sent to the faculty unit employee’s department chair. The
department chair shall provide a statement to the college dean or appropriate administrator
regarding the possible effect on the curriculum and the operation of the department should the
employee be granted a sabbatical.
3. The college dean or appropriate administrator shall consider the recommendation of the
Professional Leave Committee and the applicant’s response, pursuant to the provisions stated
above, and other campus program needs and budget implications. The dean or appropriate
administrator shall provide a statement to the President or designee approving or denying the
sabbatical leave, giving reasons for approval or denial. A copy of this statement shall be
provided to the applicant, the Professional Leave Committee, and the department chair or unit
head. The applicant shall have 10 academic days to respond to the denial of the application.
4. The President or designee shall consider the recommendations of the dean or appropriate
administrator, and the applicant’s response, pursuant to the provisions stated above. The
President or designee shall respond in writing to the applicant, indicating the reasons for
approval or denial. If a sabbatical leave is granted, the response shall include any conditions on
the leave. A copy of this response shall be provided to the affected department or unit, the
Professional Leave Committee, and the dean or appropriate administrator.
5. If a sabbatical leave is denied based on factors other than the merit of the proposal, and if
the denial results in fewer sabbaticals being awarded than 12% of eligible faculty, upon request
of the applicant, the sabbatical leave shall be deferred until the following academic year. At

103

that time, if the underlying conditions supporting the proposal remain in effect, the leave shall
be granted.
6. Eligible faculty applying for sabbatical leave are generally expected to receive it, subject to
the provisions stated above and the availability of funding. All applications for sabbatical leave
at one‐half (1/2) of full salary shall be approved if they meet the criteria set forth in this policy.
If the number of eligible applicants is large, the university shall grant no fewer sabbatical leaves
than twelve percent (12%) of the total number of faculty eligible to apply for such leaves in that
year, in addition to those faculty approved for a sabbatical at one‐half (1/2) of full salary.
Sabbaticals deferred according to Item 5 above shall be counted in the year they are taken.
7. Arrangements for accommodating sabbatical leaves may be developed by the department
and approved by the President or designee. Such arrangements may include rearranging
workload within the department as well as shifting university funding. No faculty will be
required to work involuntarily in an overload situation by such arrangements.
8. Sabbatical proposals that are recommended, but not approved due to the lack of funding,
shall be given priority for funding in subsequent years.

Legal Requirement
Final approval of a sabbatical leave shall not be granted until the applicant has filed with the
President or designee a suitable bond or an accepted statement of assets (not including PERS
holdings) and/or a promissory note that is individually or collectively at least equal to the
amount of salary paid during the leave. The guarantee posted shall indemnify the State of
California against loss in the event the employee fails to render the required service in the CSU
following return of the employee from the sabbatical leave. The guarantee posted shall
immediately be canceled in full upon completion of required service or upon waiver of that
service by mutual agreement of the faculty member and the CSU.

Post‐Sabbatical Report
Within 30 calendar days upon return from sabbatical leave, the leave‐taking faculty shall submit
a written report to the department chair or unit head describing accomplishments, with
evidence if applicable, during the leave. This report shall accompany any subsequent
application for sabbatical leave. The Professional Leave Committee will evaluate the extent to

104

which the sabbatical goals were accomplished as stated in the sabbatical application. An
unfavorable evaluation by the Professional Leave Committee shall affect the faculty’s next
application for sabbatical. The Professional Leave Committee shall submit their evaluation to
the Dean's office within 30 calendar days upon receiving the sabbatical report.

Forms
Application forms for sabbatical leaves and forms for filing a suitable bond or an accepted
statement of assets are available in the Department or unit administration office.

FAM 627.68
POLICY REGARDING SICK LEAVE
FAM 627.68 Sick Leave

[Based primarily on Article 24 of the Collective Bargaining Agreement (CBA) for Faculty
Unit Employees.]
1. Rate of Accrual
Following completion of one academic qualifying pay period or one qualifying pay
period, a full-time faculty unit employee shall accrue eight hours of credit for sick leave
with pay. Thereafter, for each additional academic qualifying pay period or qualifying
pay period, eight hours of credit for sick leave with pay shall be accrued.
Faculty unit employees who are appointed less than full-time shall accrue credit for sick
leave with pay on a pro rata basis. Sick leave may be accumulated without limit. No
additional sick leave with pay beyond that accumulated shall be granted.
2. Use of Sick Leave
The use of sick leave may be authorized only when a faculty unit employee is absent for
one of the following reasons:
2.1 Illness or injury, or disability related to pregnancy or childbirth.
2.2 Exposure to contagious disease.
2.3 Dental, eye, or other physical or medical examinations or treatments
by licensed practitioners.
105

2.4 Illness or injury in the immediate family (close relatives or persons
residing in the immediate household of the faculty unit employee,
except domestic employees or roomers).
2.5 Death of a person in the immediate family (as defined in Section 2.4).
This is a supplement to the bereavement leave provided in CBA
Sections 23.1 to 23.3.
2.6 Family leave for reason of the birth, adoption or foster care of a child. Leaves
taken for these purposes shall be initiated within one year of the birth of a child or
placement of a child with the faculty unit employee in the case of adoption or
Foster care. See CBA Section 22.14. 2.7 Family leave for the serious health
condition of a child, parent or spouse. See CBA Section 22.15.
3. Catastrophic Sick Leave
Faculty unit employees who have exhausted all accrued leave credits, i.e., sick leave,
vacation, and CTO, due to a catastrophic illness or injury may request participation in
the Catastrophic Sick Leave program in accordance with CBA Section 24.21.
Faculty unit employees may voluntarily donate sick leave credits to any other CSU
employee on the same campus in accordance with CBA Section 24.21.
4. Reporting of Sick Leave Absences
Faculty unit employees shall be responsible for immediately reporting an absence to the
appropriate administrative office. Faculty unit employees shall be responsible for
promptly completing and signing the campus absence form and returning the absence
form to the appropriate administrative office. Faculty unit employees may be required to
provide a physician's statement or other appropriate verification for absences after three
consecutive days charged to sick leave. A faculty unit employee shall not normally be
required to provide such a statement or verification for an absence of three consecutive
days or less charged to sick leave. Verification may also be required in cases where the
reason for the sick leave is birth, adoption or foster care of a child and serious health
condition of a child, parent or spouse". See CBA Sections 23.5 and 22.15.
5. Sick Leave Charges
5.1 A full-time faculty unit employee shall be charged eight hours sick leave for
each day he/she was not available to work due to an absence chargeable to sick
leave. Sick leave shall be charged from the onset of such an absence until the
employee resumes attendance at the campus. A faculty unit employee who was

106

in attendance on campus for part of a workday shall be charged such leave on a
proportional basis for an absence chargeable to sick leave.
A faculty unit employee shall not be considered to work more than five days in a
seven day period for the purpose of charging sick leave. In the case of sick leave
for reason of the birth, adoption or foster care of a child, sick leave charges shall
not apply until after the ten days leave with pay granted faculty unit employees
following the arrival of a new child [CBA Section 23.4] have been used and only
for the actual days with work assignments during the period of leave.
5.2 A less than full-time faculty unit employee shall be charged sick leave on an
hour-for-hour basis for absences chargeable to sick leave for hours of scheduled
assignments.
6. Authorization for Special Purposes
College Deans/University Librarian/Vice President for Student Services or designees
are authorized to approve sick leaves for the following special purposes:
Up to 40 hours of accrued sick leave credits for each death in the immediate family.
Up to 60 days of unpaid sick leave or the use of vacation for a faculty unit employee
who has exhausted his/her accumulated sick leave.
Unpaid sick leave in excess of 60 days when it is determined that a critical need exists.
Directed sick leave if it is determined that a faculty unit employee is unable to carry out
his/her duties due to medical incapacity.
7. Additional Provisions
Under no circumstances may a faculty unit employee be granted sick leave for days
during layoff periods, during a leave of absence without pay or during an officially
scheduled campus closure, unless the faculty unit employee is officially scheduled to
work during such a closure.
Upon request, a faculty unit employee who returns to CSU employment within 10
months following the date of separation shall be credited by the campus with his/her
sick leave balance at the time of separation from previous CSU employment. If the
faculty unit employee is appointed to a classification in which sick leave is not accrued,

107

this provision shall not apply.

FAM 633.6
POLITICAL ACTIVITY
FAM 633.6 Political Activity

The Faculty of the California State University and Colleges is subject to provisions of
the law covering elections and political activities applicable to all State residents and
included within the Government Code of the State of California, Sections 19770-19775.
A legal opinion issued by the Attorney General (May 18, 1953) reaffirms "that the right
to engage in politics is a privilege of citizenship which should not be denied State
employees in the absence of express or necessarily implied statutory prohibition, or
unless the particular activity is harmful to the State Government. No political activity
should be engaged in on State time." The following statement by the AAUP is also
offered as a guide to practice:
1. The college or university faculty member is a citizen and, like other citizens,
should be free to engage in political activities so far as he is able to do so
consistently with his obligations as a teacher and scholar.
2. Many kinds of political activity (e.g., holding part-time office in a political party,
seeking election to any office under circumstances that do not require extensive
campaigning, or serving by appointment or election in a part-time political office)
are consistent with effective service as a member of a faculty. Other kinds of
political activity (e.g., intensive campaigning for elective office, serving in a State
Legislature, or serving a limited term in a full-time position) will often require that
the professor seek a leave of absence from his college or university.
3. In recognition of the legitimacy and social importance of political activity by
professors, universities and colleges should provide institutional arrangements to
permit it, similar to those applicable to other public or private extramural service.
Such arrangements may include the reduction of the faculty member's workload
or a leave of absence for the duration of an election campaign or a term of office,
accompanied by equitable adjustment of compensation when necessary.
4. A faculty member seeking leave should recognize that he has a primary
obligation to his institution and to his growth as an educator and scholar; he
should be mindful of the problem which a leave of absence can create for his
administration, his colleagues, and his students; and he should not abuse the
privilege by too frequent or too late application or too extended a leave. If
adjustments in his favor are made, such as a reduction of workload, he should
expect them to be limited to a reasonable period.

108

5. A leave of absence incident to political activity should come under the
institution's normal rules and regulations for leaves of absence. Such a leave
should not affect unfavorably the tenure status of a faculty member, except that
time spent on such leave from academic duties need not count as probationary
service. The terms of a leave and its effect on the professor's status should be
set forth in writing.

FAM 640.5 RECRUITMENT AND APPOINTMENT OF ACADEMIC
AFFAIRS CENTRAL ADMINISTRATORS
FAM 640.5 Recruitment and Appointment of AA Central Admin (2012) .pdf
FAM 640.5 Recruitment and Appointment of AA Central Admin (2020)

Purpose and Scope
The procedures for the recruitment and appointment of Academic Affairs Central
Administrators is described herein.
Definition
The term Academic Affairs Central Administrators refers to any administrators in the division of
Academic Affairs, including Deputy, Vice, and Associate Provosts (or Vice Presidents), Dean of
the College of Extended and Global Education, Dean of the Palm Desert Campus, University
Librarian, and University Councilor. It may also cover any future Academic Affairs
administrators who interact with faculty as part of their duties.
Policy Statement
The policy described herein represents an equitable joint effort among faculty, students, staff
and administration to recruit and appoint the best qualified and most appropriate person to fill
a position of an Academic Affairs Central Administrator.
Procedure and Process
1. Recruitment committee composition
a. A Chair appointed by the Provost and Vice President for Academic Affairs. This

109

person shall be either a tenured faculty member or an academic administrator who
holds tenure within the University.
b. One (1) tenure-track faculty member elected from each College. Elections for these
positions must be completed within the three (3) week period immediately following
the request that a committee be formed.
In the event these elections are not completed as described above, the Executive
Committee of the Faculty Senate shall appoint appropriate members.
c. In the case of recruitment for a University Librarian, one (1) additional faculty
member who shall be a librarian shall be elected.
This person shall be elected by and from among the librarians. In the event this
election is not completed as described above, the chair of this committee shall
appoint an appropriate member.
d. In the case of the recruitment for a University Counselor one (1) additional faculty
member who shall be a counselor shall be elected. This person shall be elected by
and from among the counselors. In the event the election is not completed as
described above, the chair of the committee will appoint an appropriate member.
e. One (1) currently registered full-time graduate or undergraduate student shall be
appointed by the Associated Students and within the time as stated above.
f. One (1) non-academic staff member who holds permanent status within the
University and whose position is directly related to the position being filled shall be
appointed by the Provost and Vice President for Academic Affairs.
g. The Provost and Vice President for Academic Affairs may appoint additional faculty
members (in consultation with the Faculty Senate Executive Committee), students,
staff members, administrators or others so as to reflect such concerns as, but not
limited to, community interest, diversity or specific area expertise.
If additional members are appointed to the committee the final composition shall
normally consist of a majority of faculty members.
2. Recruitment procedures
FAM 640.5; 2020
Appointment of Central Administrators
3
a. Announcements of position openings shall be made by the Provost and Vice
President for Academic Affairs in compliance with state and federal law. In all cases
the announcements shall appear in specialized publications which pertain to the
position. Other forms such as direct mailings, internet advertising, postings on

110

related message boards and "flyers" may also be used.
b. Additional consultation, including external expertise, such as a search firm, may be
used by the committee during the search.
c. Wording of these announcements shall be such that they specify the job description,
qualifications necessary for appointment and any academic requirements. All job
descriptions must comply fully with legal requirements for affirmative action and
equal opportunity employment. A deadline date for completed applications must
also be included.
d. Candidates' letters of applications and accrued files shall be maintained and kept in
the Office of the Provost and Vice President for Academic Affairs. All files shall
remain confidential.
3. Recruitment committee procedures
a. The Academic Affairs Central Administrator's Recruitment Committee shall review all
applicants' files. Procedures for doing so shall be established by the committee.
Criteria and standards for the review process shall be established by the committee
in consultation with the Provost and Vice President for Academic Affairs.. In
consultation with the Provost and Vice President for Academic Affairs, the
committee shall select a finalist list of candidates for on-campus interviews.
c. The committee shall take an active part in these on-campus interviews of all finalists.
d. After the completion of all on-campus interviews of all finalists, the committee shall
prepare a report on these finalists and submit it without any preferential order to
the Provost and Vice President for Academic Affairs.. The Provost and Vice
President for Academic Affairs shall present the names of these finalists along with
the committee's recommendations and with additional recommendations if
appropriate, to the President.
4. Appointment
Academic Affairs Central Administrators are appointed by and serve at the pleasure of
the President. Appointments shall be made from a list of candidates provided by the
recruiting committee in consultation with the Provost and Vice President for Academic
Affairs.
FAM 640.5; 2020
Appointment of Central Administrators
4
5. Conditions of Appointment
a. In order to be appointed Deputy, Vice, or Associate Provost for Academic Programs,

111

Academic Research, or Faculty Affairs and Development, the candidate must possess
the qualifications for a tenure-line academic appointment in a department in the
university as determined by the Department Evaluation Committee. Should the
Department Evaluation Committee not be composed entirely of faculty in the
department, the decision to recommend academic appointment shall be made by a
majority of the department tenure-line faculty. A positive recommendation will lead
to an academic appointment of the candidate. The eventual appointee may also be
granted tenure following this approval process.
b. The University Librarian and the Dean of the College of Extended and Global
Education may be granted an academic appointment and tenure following the same
process as described in Provision a above.
6. Interim Appointment
If circumstances require the appointment of an interim or acting Academic Affairs Central
Administrator, the Provost and Vice President for Academic Affairs shall consult appropriate
faculty, staff and administrators before making a recommendation to the President.

FAM 640.6 POLICY STATEMENT CONCERNING
RECRUITMENT AND APPOINTMENT OF THE PROVOST/VICE PRESIDENT FOR
ACADEMIC AFFAIRS
FAM 640.6 Recruitment of VP of AA

PREAMBLE:
The policy described herein represents an equitable joint effort among faculty, students, staff
and administration to recruit and appoint the best qualified and most appropriate person to fill
the position of Provost/Vice President for Academic Affairs.
1. Recruitment Committee Composition:
The Provost/Vice President for Academic Affairs' Recruitment Committee shall be
constituted as follows:
1.1 A Chairperson appointed by the President of the University. This person shall be
either a tenured faculty member or an academic administrator who holds tenure within
the University.
112

1.2 Five (5) tenure-track faculty members elected, one (1) from each College.
Elections for these positions must be completed within the three (3) week period
immediately following the request that a committee be formed.
In the event these elections are not completed as described above, the Executive
Committee of the Faculty Senate shall appoint appropriate members.
1.3 One (1) currently registered graduate or undergraduate student shall be appointed
by the Associated Students and within the time as stated in 1.2 above.
1.4 One (1) non-academic staff member who holds permanent status within the
University and whose position is directly related to the position being filled, shall be
appointed by the President of the University.
1.5 One (1) librarian elected by the librarians. Elections for the position must be
completed within three (3) week period immediately following the request that a
committee be formed.
1.6 One (1) counselor elected by the counselors. Elections for the position must be
completed within three (3) week period immediately following the request that a
committee be formed.
1.7 The President of the University may appoint to the committee additional faculty
members (in consultation with the Faculty Senate Executive Committee), students, staff
members, administrators or others so as to reflect such concerns as, but not limited to,
community interest, diversity or specific area expertise.
If additional members are appointed to the committee the final composition shall
normally consist of a majority of faculty members.
2. Recruitment Procedures:
2.1 Announcement of a position opening shall be made by the President of the
University in compliance with state and federal law. Other consultation may occur if also
desired. In all cases the announcements shall appear in specialized publications which

113

pertain to the position being filled. Other forms such as direct mailings, internet
advertising, postings on related message boards, and "flyers" may also be used.
2.2 Additional consultation, including external expertise, such as a search firm, may be
used by the committee during the search.
2.3 Wording of these announcements shall be such that they specify the job description,
qualifications necessary for appointment and any academic requirements. All job
descriptions must comply fully with legal requirements for affirmative action and equal
opportunity employment. A deadline date for completed applications must also be
included.
2.4 Candidate's letters of application and accrued files shall be maintained and kept in
the Office of the President of the University. All files shall remain confidential.
3. Recruitment Committee Procedures:
3.1 The Provost/Vice President for Academic Affairs' Recruitment Committee shall
review all applicants' files. Procedures for doing so shall be established by the
committee. Criteria and standards for the review process shall be established by the
committee in consultation with the President of the University.
3.2 In consultation with the President of the University, the committee shall select a
finalist list of candidates for on-campus interviews (refer to item 3.4 below).
3.3 The committee shall take an active part in these on-campus interviews of all
finalists.
3.4 After the completion of all on-campus interviews of all finalists, the committee shall
prepare recommendations on these finalists and submit them without any preferential
order to the President of the University.
4. Appointment:
The Provost/Vice President for Academic Affairs is appointed by and serves at
the pleasure of the President of the University. The appointment shall be made
from a list of candidates for the office provided by the Provost/Vice President for
Academic Affairs' recruiting committee.

114

5. Conditions of Appointment:
The Provost/Vice President for Academic Affairs shall qualify for appointment in
an academic department, shall receive approval of the appropriate departmental
evaluation committee, and following their approval may be granted tenure.
6. Interim Appointments:
If circumstances require the appointment of an interim or acting Provost/Vice
President for Academic Affairs, the President of the University shall consult with
appropriate faculty, staff, students and administrators before making the
appointment.

FAM 641.3 POLICY STATEMENT CONCERNING
RECRUITMENT AND APPOINTMENT OF COLLEGE DEANS
FAM 641.3 Recruitment and Appointment of Deans

Preamble:
The policy described herein represents an equitable joint effort among faculty, students, staff
and administration to recruit and appoint the best qualified and most appropriate person to fill
the position of a College Dean in this University.
1. Recruitment Committee Composition:
The College Dean's Recruitment Committee shall be constituted as follows:
1.1 A Chairperson appointed by the Vice President for Academic Affairs. This person
shall be either a tenured faculty member or an academic administrator who holds
tenure within the University.
1.2 Five (5) faculty members, at least three (3) tenured and of senior rank, elected from
within the College whose Dean is to be appointed. In Colleges with five (5) or more
departments, no more than one (1) faculty member shall be elected from the same
department. In colleges with fewer than five (5) departments, at least one (1) member
shall be elected from each Department.

115

Elections for these positions must be completed within the three (3) week period
immediately following the request that a committee must be formed.
1.3 One (1) currently registered full-time graduate or undergraduate student majoring in
a subject within the college whose Dean is to be appointed. This person is to be
appointed by the Vice President for Academic Affairs in consultations with the
Associated Students and within a time period as stated in 1.2 above.
1.4 One (1) non-academic staff member who holds permanent status within the college
whose Dean is to be appointed. This person is to be appointed by the Vice President for
Academic Affairs.
1.5 The Vice President for Academic Affairs may appoint to the committee additional
faculty members (with consultation of the Faculty Senate Executive Committee),
students, staff members, administrators or others so as to reflect such concerns as, but
not limited to, community interest, equal opportunity or specific program
constituencies.
If additional members are appointed to the committee, the final composition shall
consist of a majority of faculty members.
2. Recruitment Procedures:
2.1 Announcements of position openings shall be made by the Vice President for
Academic Affairs. In all cases the announcements shall appear in specialized publications
which pertain to the appropriate College. Other forms such as direct mailings, internet
advertising, postings on related message boards, and "flyers" may also be used.
2.2 Additional consultation, including external expertise, such as a search firm,
may be used by the committee during the search.
2.3 Wording of these announcements shall be such that it specifies the job description,
qualifications necessary for appointment and academic requirements. All job
descriptions must comply fully with legal requirements for equal opportunity
employment. A deadline date for completed applications must also be included.
2.4 Candidates' letters of application and accrued files shall be maintained and kept in
the office of the Vice President for Academic Affairs. All files shall remain confidential.

116

3. Recruitment Committee Procedures:
3.1 The College Dean's Recruitment Committee shall review all applicants' files.
Procedures for doing so shall be established by the committee. Criteria and standards
for the review process shall be established by the committee in consultation with the
Vice President for Academic Affairs.
3.2 In consultation with the Vice President for Academic Affairs, the committee shall
select a finalist list of candidates for on-campus interviews.
3.3 The committee shall take an active part in these on-campus interviews of all finalists.
3.4 After the completion of all on-campus interviews of all finalists, the committee shall
prepare recommendations based on the perceived strengths and weaknesses of these
finalists and submit them to the Vice President for Academic Affairs.
3.5 The Vice President for Academic Affairs shall present the names of these finalists
along with the committee’s recommendations and with additional recommendations, if
appropriate, to the President of the University.
4. Appointment:
College Deans are appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the President of the
University. Appointments shall be made from a list of candidates provided by the
College Deans' Recruitment Committee in consultation with the Vice President for
Academic Affairs.
5. Conditions of Appointment:
College Deans shall qualify for appointment in an academic department within the
appropriate College shall receive approval of the departmental evaluation committee
and following the committee’s approval, may be granted tenure.

RECRUITMENT AND APPOINTMENT OF DEPARTMENT CHAIRS

117

FAM 641.5
RECRUITMENT AND APPOINTMENT OF DEPARTMENT CHAIRS
FAM 641.5 Recruitment and Appointment of Department Chairs.pdf
Table of Contents
Table of Contents 1
Purpose and Scope 1
Definitions 1
Policy Statement 2
Department Chair Search Committee 2
Internal or External Appointment 3
Nomination Procedures for Candidates Internal to the University 3
Procedures for Candidates External to the University 5
Appointment of Interim Department Chair 8
Approvals 9
History 9
Purpose and Scope
This policy governs all aspects of the recruitment and appointment of department chairs.
Definitions
Department: This term refers to a department or a school (e.g. School of Social Work and
School of Computer Science and Engineering.
Department chair: This term refers to both the chair of a department and the director of a
school.
Policy Statement
Department chairs are selected from a list of highly qualified candidates who served as
instructional faculty recommended by the department. Normally this list will consist of two or
more names.
Department chairs are appointed to three-year terms and serve at the pleasure of the Provost.
No limit is set to the number of terms, or parts thereof, an individual may serve as chair as long
as the department review processes are met satisfactorily. Appointments shall normally begin
in the Fall Semester of an Academic Year.
Department chairs perform duties and carry out responsibilities defined by established
administrative procedures and stated in FAM 641.65. Department Chairs are expected to
provide leadership and facilitate the orderly conduct of the affairs of the department.

118

Additional responsibilities may be assigned by the dean, Provost, or the President.
Department Chair Search Committee
1. When the Provost's decision is to appoint a department chair, the appropriate college
dean shall make a request to the department to form a Department Chair Search
Committee via an election process.
2. The size of the committee shall be agreed upon by the department involved. A
suggested set of limits is from three to five tenure track faculty members with at least
one tenured faculty on the committee. Anyone applying for this position shall not serve
on the committee. The Committee shall select its own chairperson, who must be a
tenured Associate Professor or Professor
3. As long as an internal candidate is viable for the position, the person may not
participate in the search process. However, if the candidate is not chosen or withdraws
from further consideration, the person may serve in the capacity of a department tenureline faculty with the right to vote from that point forward.
4. The role of the department chair in the search process is to oversee the process and
to ensure that the letter and spirit of this policy is followed and to assist the Search
Committee.
5. A college dean shall appoint to the committee, when possible, a student majoring in a
subject within the department. This student must be of senior level or graduate level
and completed the residency requirement of the university. The student representative
serves as the voice for the students but may not vote in the selection process.
6. The college dean may appoint to the committee a non-academic staff member, who
holds permanent status within the college office.
7. If the interim department chair is a candidate for the position, the college dean may
appoint a department chair from a closely related field to perform the role of the
department chair in the search process.
Internal or External Appointment
1. When a Department Chair vacancy occurs, the Provost, following consultation with
members of the department involved and in consultation with the appropriate college
dean, shall decide whether to appoint a department chair from within (internal to) or
from outside (external to) the University.
2. If the Provost’s decision is to appoint a department chair from outside (external to) the
University, faculty from within (internal to) the University may still apply.

119

Nomination Procedures for Candidates Internal to the University
1. All proceedings of the search process shall remain confidential.
2. The announcement of a position opening shall be made by the appropriate college
dean in consultation with the Search Committee. Wording of the announcement shall be
such that it specifies the job description, qualifications necessary for appointment as
Chair, and materials to be submitted by applicants. A review date for applications and
the rank of the hire shall be included.
3. Candidates shall minimally submit the following in the application: curriculum vitae
(CV), statement of managerial style/goals/vision, statement of qualifications, and a list of
three references, who can speak on behalf of the candidate.
4. Once the closing date has passed, the Search Committee shall submit a list of
applicants who meet the minimum qualifications to all departmental tenure-line faculty
members for their review and written comments. All tenure-line faculty will have access
to applicants' files during this process. The voting faculty member should state for each
applicant if the applicant is acceptable or not-acceptable for further consideration.
Applicants who are not accepted by an absolute majority of the faculty eligible to vote
shall be removed from further consideration. [Note: an absolute majority in this context
means greater than 50% of the tenure-line faculty eligible to vote irrespective of
whether they do so.]
5. Applicants accepted by an absolute majority of the tenure-line faculty shall be
interviewed by the Search Committee with provisions made for department
participation in the interview process. Following the interview, the Search Committee
will inform the candidate that additional individuals not on the list provided may be
contacted for reference. The Search Committee shall thereupon rank the candidates.
Names of applicants and their ranked order accepted by a majority of the tenure track
departmental faculty members, along with all written comments and Search Committee
recommendations, shall be forwarded by the chair of the Search Committee to the
appropriate college dean.
6. If no applicants are accepted by the majority of the tenure track department faculty
members and there are no other viable candidates, then an interim chair will be
appointed as per the section on Appointment of Interim Chair, below.
7. After receiving the ranked order list of acceptable candidates along with the
departmental written comments and Search Committee recommendations, the College
Dean shall review all materials and prepare separate written comments and
recommendations. These, along with those materials received from the Nomination
Committee including the list of nominees, shall then be forwarded to the Provost.

120

8. The Provost shall consider all materials received, including written comments and
recommendations, and shall make the appointment of department chair from the list of
nominees submitted.
9. If the Provost does not make an appointment from the list submitted, the search
process shall return to Section 3 above and proceed from there.
Procedures for Candidates External to the University
1. All proceedings of the search process shall remain confidential.
2. The Search Committee shall recommend only those candidates whose credentials
have been reviewed and selected by the majority of tenure track faculty of the
department.
3. The search process for "external" candidate shall follow this modified version of FAM
642.4: Recruiting and appointment of probationary faculty. Internal candidates may also
apply for this position. Position description should include rank, tenure status, time
base, discipline specific requirements, and date of application review.
4. As a first step in advertising the positions, the department shall develop vacancy
announcements. Such announcements shall be approved by the college dean and
recommendation from the Assistant Director for Diversity Initiatives before they are
distributed. The vacancy announcement should include minimum qualifications (these
should relate to job requirements), contents of a dossier, a statement "application
review date/position will remain open until filled or closed by the department," rank,
certifications, credentials, and any additional current legal requirement to be provided
by the Office of Faculty Affairs and Development.
5. Faculty Affairs and Development will pay for the posting of the position announcement
on Chronicle of Higher Education, Faculty Affairs and Development website, CSU
Careers, and other job websites or publications to reach the broadest possible audience.
The department should use a variety of available methods to ensure diversity and
maximize application pool. Such activities may include but are not limited to personal
contacts, advertisement in appropriate professional resources, graduate programs, and
other activities that the department deems appropriate. For purposes of diversity, an
effort should be made to contact departments or programs where qualified members of
underrepresented groups may be located. The department shall endeavor to maximize
the diversity of the applicant pool by taking advantage of personal contacts, and by
advertising in organizations that target underrepresented candidates.
6. A dossier should be established in the electronic recruitment management system.
The candidate will submit minimally a letter of application, curriculum vitae, letter of
application, a list of references and contact information from individuals who are

121

qualified to comment, unofficial transcripts of all post-secondary degrees claimed by the
candidate (official transcripts will be required prior to appointment). The department
may request additional information, which may include letter of recommendation,
philosophy or statement of teaching, leadership, etc., proof of professional licensure
and/or credentials, student evaluations of teaching, if available, portfolio, etc.
7. After the application review date, the Search Committee and department chair must
review the applications and create a list of minimally qualified applicants.
8. The Assistant Director for Diversity Initiatives will review the list of candidates and
make a recommendation for the purpose of diversity.
9. The Assistant Director for Diversity Initiatives has two working days to render a
recommendation and justification to the chair of the Search Committee and
director/chair of department.
10. If underutilization of underrepresented groups for a discipline exists in the qualified
applicant pool, the Assistant Director for Diversity Initiatives will discuss the concerns
with the recruitment committee, chair of department, and appropriate administrators.
The Search Committee either can provide an evidence of good faith efforts within the
context of the discipline to maximize the applicant pool or reopen the application
process.
11. If the recommendation by the Assistant Director for Diversity Initiatives is not to move
forward based on diversity concerns, the chair of department and the Chair of the
Search Committee will discuss the matter with the college dean. If the college dean
agrees with the chair of department and the chair of the search committee, they can
appeal the decision to the Provost for moving the process forward. The department
chair, chair of the search committee, and/or the college dean will be given an opportunity
to present the department’s case to the Provost in a timely manner. The Provost renders
a decision. If the provost does not approve the list, the search committee must take
necessary steps to diversify the pool.
12. If the roster is recommended to move forward, the search committee, in consultation
with the department chair, evaluates the contents of the candidates’ files and selects
candidates for a personal interview initially by phone. The phone interview will be
performed by the search committee and department chair. At the end of the call,
permission to contact other individuals not on the reference list will be obtained from
the candidate. Questions used for reference checks and personal phone interviews
must be the same for all candidates being considered. After the phone interview, the
department faculty will be given access to applicants' CV, statements from the
candidates, and summary of the phone interview. The tenure track faculty in the
department will vote whether the candidates are acceptable or unacceptable and rank
the candidates for on-campus interview. The search committee and department chair will

122

contact the references on and off the list and summarize the findings for each candidate
to be invited for on- campus interview. A separate file with original notes and comments
will be kept in the department office for future reference. A list and completed files of
candidates being invited for the on-campus interview must be submitted to the college
dean with the justifications for final approval prior to inviting the candidates to campus.
13. The on-campus visit scheduled for each candidate should allow department to
evaluate/observe candidate’s ability to teach and meet the department's expectations
in the areas of research/ scholarship/creative activity and of service. All tenure track
faculty of the department shall be informed of the date(s) of the visit and be provided a
copy of the schedule along with a sign-up sheet to participate fully in the interview
process. A copy of the candidate's vita should be made available to on-campus
individuals who are planning to meet the candidate.
During the campus visit, the candidate should minimally meet the search committee as
a body, faculty in the department, department chair, and college dean. The candidates
may visit directors of campus resources such as Teaching Resource Center, Office of
Community Engagement, Sponsored Program, Center for International Studies and
Programs (CISP), etc. The candidate meets with the department chair at the end of the
interview process. The search committee and department faculty are expected to fully
participate in the on-campus interview process. Search committee will solicit comments
from those who came in contact with the candidate and a summary of those comments
will be placed in the candidate's file.
14. Following completion of on-campus interviews, the search committee and
department chair shall meet with tenure track faculty of department to discuss and solicit
comments regarding each candidate. Each tenure-track faculty will vote to approve or
disapprove the candidates and rank the candidates. Voting on the final recommendation
is limited to faculty who participated in the on-campus visits. This result of the vote will
be submitted to the college dean.
15. If the list of candidates is not accepted by an absolute majority of the tenure track
faculty of the department, then items 7 through 13 shall repeat until 14 if fulfilled. Any
applications received after the review date may be considered until the department's
vote for phone interview. After that process, the late candidate(s) may be considered
only if the existing list of candidates is deemed unacceptable.
16. Based on the vote and comments, the search committee shall then prepare a final
list of nominees ranked in preferential order. This final list and the completed files of the
nominees on the final list shall be forwarded to the college dean who shall review all
materials and prepare written comments and recommendations. The college dean shall
then forward all materials to the Provost.
17. The Provost shall consider all materials and shall make the appointment of
department chair from the final list of nominees submitted.

123

18. If the Provost does not make an appointment from the final list submitted, then
Section 5 of this policy shall repeat until an appointment is made or interim chair will be
appointed.
Appointment of Interim Department Chair
In the event there is a need to appoint an interim department chair, the Provost,
following
consultation with members of the department involved and in consultation with the
appropriate college dean, shall make the appointment. A chair external to the
department or college shall not have the voting privileges as a faculty member in the
department or college; that person’s faculty status remains in the home department or
college.

FAM 641.65
RESPONSIBILITIES OF DEPARTMENT CHAIRS/SCHOOL DIRECTORS
Department Chairs/School Directors serve in a leadership capacity in support of the College's
mission. They provide academic and administrative leadership and facilitate the orderly conduct
of the affairs of the Department/School and the College. Their responsibilities, to varying
degrees, include, but are not limited to, the following: With respect to the representation of the
department/school
●
●
●
●
●

Represent the department/school on established College, division, and university
councils or committees.
Maintain active involvement with discipline-based professional association at state,
regional, and national levels.
Articulate and communicate the department's/school’s mission, insuring that it fits the
overall goals of the College and University.
Serve as the advocate of the department's/school’s goals and needs and whenever
major curricular decisions are being made.
Serve as the spokesperson for the department to the external community.

With respect to the future development of the department/school
● In conjunction with the faculty, develop and implement a strategic plan that emanates
from the department's/school’s mission and goals statement.
● In conjunction with the faculty, monitor the department's/school’s effectiveness in
meeting goals based on an assessment plan.
● In conjunction with the faculty, initiate and supervise the department's/school’s activities
and efforts in the recruiting and retention of students.
● Promote discipline-based contact with appropriate off-campus groups, such as high
school teachers, community organizations, professional organizations, etc.
124

●
●

Provide leadership in development activities that links to the department's/school’s
alumni.
Work with school deans and University development office to increase gifts and
benefactors.

With respect to the curriculum
● Foster periodic examination and review of the department's/school’s curricular offerings
and the department's/school’s contribution to the General Education Program.
● Develop and maintain programs that meet accrediting and licensing standards where
appropriate.
● Exercise leadership in proposing and developing curricular changes when necessary.
● Lead department in carrying out required external reviews of academic programs and
assessment of student learning outcomes.
With respect to instruction and related matters
●
●
●
●

Supervise arrangements for lectures and public events sponsored by the
department/school.
Supervise the operation of program-related activities such as clinics, and
laboratories.
Promote and support faculty grant applications and sponsored research.
Determine need and, if appropriate, arrange and assist in the development of distance
learning courses.

With respect to budget and resources
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

In conjunction with the faculty, develop department/school budgetary plans and other
resource requests.
Allocate and manage departmental/school budgets.
Work with appropriate University administrators in planning for use of new facilities and
the College and University levels.
Supervise the ordering of department/school equipment and supplies.
Assume responsibility for the proper use, maintenance and security of equipment
assigned to the department/school.
Develop and implement appropriate procedures for the use, maintenance and repair of
equipment.
Manage FTES targets commensurate with resources, quality of instruction, and
department/school mission.

With respect to the scheduling and assignment of workload
● Develop, in consultation with the faculty, an annual schedule of workload assignments.
Such workload assignments should reflect the programmatic offerings of the
department/school, a balanced distribution of courses, the needs of the students, the

125

professional development of the faculty, the nature of the department's/school’s
activities, and the mission of the department/school, College, and the University.
With respect to the faculty
● Encourage and support faculty professional development.
● Establish plans for providing mentors for new faculty members.
● Assist probationary faculty in understanding the evaluation process and criteria for
retention, promotion, and tenure and in presenting accurate and effective Faculty
Activities Reports.
● In conjunction with department, review and maintain a current pool of potential
candidates for temporary faculty positions.
● Encourage participation in exchange programs such as Fulbrights and summer
institutes.
● Appoint faculty to non-elective department responsibilities.
● Mediate conflicts and attempt to resolve problems between faculty and students/staff.
● Exercise leadership in the recruiting and appointment of tenure-track faculty.
Specifically, ensure that requests for positions are appropriately submitted, recruiting
committees elected, candidates are interviewed, and appointments recommended all in
accordance with the CBA and the University's policies and procedures.
With respect to the supervision of staff personnel and student assistants
● Exercise leadership in the appointment of staff personnel, both permanent and
temporary.
● Appropriately supervise the clerical and technical staff assigned to the department.
● Conduct performance evaluations on the staff personnel.
● Encourage and support staff training and development.
● Arrange for the proper supervision of student assistants.
With respect to the students
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

Develop and administer admission processes where appropriate.
In conjunction with members of the department/school, develop and coordinate a
program of orientation and advisement that meets the needs of students.
Develop and administer student progress reviews where appropriate.
Foster and promote the development of departmental/school student clubs, as
appropriate.
Encourage student participation in exchange programs.
Respond to students' requests for waiver of departmental/school regulations,
independent study proposals, internships, and related special student concerns.
Respond to student-initiated concerns and problems, as appropriate.

126

FAM 642.4
RECRUITING AND APPOINTMENT OF
TENURE-LINE FACULTY
FAM 641.65 Responsibilities of Chairs

PURPOSE
The hiring of a tenure-line faculty requires the election of a faculty recruiting committee and
involves position approval, position announcement, initial screening and interview, campus
visit, and appointment. This document sets forth policies that govern all aspects of this process.
FACULTY RECRUITING COMMITTEE
The Faculty Recruiting Committee shall be composed of at least three (3) tenure-line faculty,
one of whom must be tenured. If the hiring unit-which is typically an academic department or
school-does not have three (3) tenure-line faculty or a tenured faculty, it shall elect needed
faculty from closely related fields. The head of the hiring unit-the chair of a department or the
director of a school-shall serve as an ex officio member, with voting rights. The committee shall
select its chair.
The hiring unit shall strive to ensure that the committee is diverse in representation in terms of
ethnicity, gender, and sexual orientation. The college dean may appoint to the recruiting
committee one additional faculty member for either of the following two purposes:
1. To enhance diversity in the hiring process. The appointee shall preferably be
a faculty member in the same college and shall be selected in consultation
with the head of the hiring unit and the elected committee. He or she will
assist the committee in its efforts to enhance diversity in the hiring process in
a range of aspects, for example to attract a diverse pool of applicants and to
increase members' awareness of potential biases in the process. The
appointee will not have voting rights on the committee.
2. To enhance the composition of the committee, for example to include a
variety of employment longevity. The appointment should be made in
consultation and agreement with the head of the hiring unit and a majority of
the elected committee members. If the appointee is from within the hiring unit,
he or she shall have voting rights. If the appointee is from outside the hiring
unit, he or she shall not have voting rights.

127

Deliberations of the Faculty Recruiting committee shall be confidential.
POSITION APPROVAL
The filling of a tenure-line faculty position is typically initiated by the hiring unit and is approved
by the college dean and the provost and vice president of Academic Affairs (hereafter "the
provost"). The form used for this purpose is the Requisition/Recruitment Form (Appendix A),
which shall include the position job description and the rank of the position to be filled.
POSITION ANNOUNCEMENT
The hiring unit is responsible for developing a vacancy announcement and a recruiting and
advertising plan. The announcement and plan shall be approved by the college dean and the
Office of Diversity. The vacancy announcement should include the rank and minimum
qualifications for the position, the statement that salary is commensurate with experience,
application deadline, the request for a diversity statement, and any other legal requirement not
herein included. The recruitment and advertising plan should include strategies for attracting a
diverse and qualified pool of applicants, sources to attract applicants from underrepresented
groups, and a set of well-defined evaluation criteria.
The Office of Faculty Affairs and Development shall post and fund the position announcement
on its own website, Chronicle of Higher Education, and CSU Careers. The hiring unit is
responsible for advertising in its professional organizations' job websites or publications and is
encouraged to distribute the job announcement to relevant terminal degree granting
institutions.
Special efforts should be made by all parties to promote diversity in the hiring process. These
efforts include, but are not limited to, contacting departments or programs where qualified
members of underrepresented groups may be located, soliciting applications via personal
contacts, and advertising in targeted media outlets that attract underrepresented candidates.
INITIAL SCREENING AND INTERVIEW
The Faculty Recruiting Committee shall select from the candidate pool applicants for initial
interview and then select from those interviewed a list of finanlists for campus visit.

128

1. Initial Screening. To be considered for the first screening, a candidate's file on the
electronic recruitment management system must include contact information, three (3)
letters of recommendation, copies of transcripts of all degrees, and evidence of teaching
effectiveness such as teaching portfolios, reports on teaching observations, and/or
student evaluations of teaching (if available), The Faculty Recruiting Committee shall
identify applicants who meet required qualifications. Those who meet required
qualifications shall constitute the candidate pool. The Office of Diversity shall compile
the diversity data of the pool and, within two working days, provide the hiring unit a
recommendation \-with justification-whether the search should proceed. If the
recommendation is in the negative but the hiring unit does not agree, the hiring unit
shall be given the opportunity to request reconsideration by producing evidence of its
good-faith effort to obtain a diverse applicant pool.
If the hiring unit and the Office of Diversity still disagree on whether the search should
proceed, the matter is referred to the college dean. If the dean agrees with the Office of
Diversity, the search is halted and may reopen. If the dean agrees with the hiring unit,
the hiring unit, the dean, and the Office of Diversity shall meet together with the
provost to discuss the matter. The Provost's decision, which should be rendered either
at the meeting or immediately after, is final.
The Faculty Recruiting Committee shall select candidates from the pool for
intial interview.
2. Initial Interview. The initial interview can be conducted ether electronically (e.g. via
telephone or video conferencing) or in person (e.g. at a professional conference). The
Faculty Recruiting Committee shall select from the interviewees a list of finalists for
campus visit and conduct reference checks of these candidates. For the initial interview
and the reference check, the same set of questions should be used for all candidates.
CAMPUS VISIT
Campus visits shall be approved by the college dean. A CV shall be made available to
the hiring unit faculty.
The campus visit by a finalist should normally include the following activities:
1. A teaching demonstration.
2. A presentation on research, scholarship, or creative activities.
3. Meetings with the head of the hiring unit and the dean.
4. Meetings with the hiring unit faculty.

129

5. Meetings with directors of campus resources such as the Faculty Center for
Excellence.
6. Meeting with the Center for International Studies and Programs if the candidate selfidentifies as a non-US resident or citizen.
Participation in the campus visit by the hiring unit faculty is strongly encouraged. Those who do
not participate shall not have the right to cast the advisory vote stipulated below.
APPOINTMENT
1. Process for Appointment. Following the completion of the campus visit, the Faculty
Recruiting Committee shall select from the finalists a candidate or candidates to be
recommended for appointment. The tenure-line faculty of the hiring unit shall then cast
an advisory vote of acceptability of the selected candidate(s).
Recommendations by the Faculty Recruiting Committee, comments by the head of the
hiring unit, and the results of the faculty's advisory vote are forwarded to the college
dean.
If the college dean agrees with the recommendation(s), an unofficial offer of
employment shall be made, with a statement that its final fulfillment is contingent upon
the satisfactory completion of a background check by the university central
administration and the approval of the provost. If the offer is accepted by the candidate,
an appointment folder that includes Forms B and C (Appendices B and C) and the
candidate's file is sent to the Associate Provost for Faculty Affairs and Development ,
who ensures the completeness of the file before presenting it to the provost for
appointment. The appointment letter by the provost is the sole representation of the
university's commitment to the candidate for employment.
If the dean, after extensive consultation with the hiring unit, does not agree with the
recommendation of the Faculty Recruiting Committee, the candidate concerned will be
out of contention.
2. Terms of Appointment
A. The period of the initial appointment is normally two (2) years.
B. The probationary period is normally six (6) years.
C. The appointee may be granted up to two (2) years of service credit

130

towards probation based on prior experience. The granting of service
credit must be recommended by the head of the hiring unit and the dean
and approved by the provost.
D. If the appointee's required terminal degree is pending, s/he will be
appointed as visiting professor for one (1) academic year, with the understanding that
tenure-line status will be granted when the degree is completed during that period.
3. Documentation for Appointment. The file appointment shall include the following:
A. Position description and copy of the Recruitment/Requisition Form
(Appendix A).
B. Printout of the on line recruitment tool with the applicant's name.
C. Letter of application and vita.
D. Diversity statement.
E. Official transcripts of all degrees.
F. Three (3) letters of recommendation.
G. Documentation on at least three (3) reference checks.
H. Evidence of teaching effectiveness, such as teaching portfolios, reports on
teaching observations, and/or student evaluations of teaching (if
available).
I. Comments from the initial interview.
J. Comments by members of the university from outside the hiring unit who
have met the candidate.
K. Faculty Recruiting Committee comments.
L. The result of the the hiring unit's advisory vote.
M. Comments by the head of the hiring unit.
N. The college dean's comments and recommendation.
0. Signed appointment form by the chair of the Faculty Recruiting
Committee, the head of the hiring unit, and the dean.
P. Justification for service credit (if applicable).
Should the appointee be hired out of a lecturer position at CSUSB, his or her file should
include, in addition to the above and if available, documents of teaching effectiveness
such as SOTEs, class visitation reports, and evaluation reports.
Appendix A: Requisition/Recruitment form and web link
Appendix B: Form B: template and web link
Appendix C: Form C: template and web link

131

FAM 642.5
POLICY CONCERNING GRANT-RELATED/SPECIALLY-FUNDED INSTRUCTIONAL
FACULTY APPOINTMENTS
FAM 642.4 Recruitment and Appt of Tenure Line Faculty
Article I: Statement of Policy
The purpose of the Grant-Related/Specially-Funded Instructional Faculty (GRSFIF)
classification policy is to establish the means by which instructional faculty engaged in
substantial grant activity can be granted a GRSFIF classification. GRSFIF appointments allow
California State University, San Bernardino (CSUSB) to recognize outstanding research
contributions through the use of non-state resources to supplement or augment salary during
the period of the GRSFIF appointment.
Article II: Definitions
1. “Grant-Related/Specially-Funded Instructional Faculty (GRSFIF) member”
means a California State University, San Bernardino instructional faculty member who
is awarded a GRSFIF appointment.
2. GRSFIF appointment means a non-permanent academic year GRSFIF
classification or a 12-month GRSFIF classification. The classification can be used for
grant-funded faculty assignments as well as faculty assignments funded by gifts and
bequests or by Foundation allocations. The GRSFIF classifications provide for
additional salary at a range specified by the Faculty Collective Bargaining Agreement.
Differential percentage may range from 5% up to a current maximum of 35% above the
faculty member’s academic year or 12 month base salary.
3. Grant means a financial contribution to a Recipient to carry out an approved project
or activity.
Article III: GRSFIF Application and Award process
1. Eligibility
In order to be considered for a GRSFIF appointment, the faculty member must meet the
following criteria:
A. The faculty member must be tenured or tenure track and primarily responsible for
annual grant and contract expenditures (direct + indirect) normally exceeding $550,000
in volume. The $550,000 minimum is in expenditures, not awards (in case awards are
underspent and applicable indirect costs not recovered), and is determined by
expenditures in the fiscal year prior to the application.
132

B. Normally, an individual appointed to the GRSFIF classification shall have the
responsibility as a Project Director and/or Principal Investigator. The faculty member’s
grant and contract funds must buy out a minimum of 20% of the faculty member’s 1.0
time base appointment during the academic year.
C. The faculty member’s grant and contract activity must clearly be related to the
faculty member’s regular University responsibilities and must make a substantial
contribution to CSUSB’s mission and vision.
D. The faculty member must be involved in the instructional program through
classroom/laboratory teaching and/or mentoring students in training, research, or
creative activities.
E. The faculty member appointed to a GRSFIF classification shall demonstrate
exceptional professional merit in scholarship and teaching as evidenced by regional or
national stature in his or her discipline with a continuous record of recognized
leadership and significant achievement in creative or scholarly work.
2. Source of Funding.
A. Non-state funds must be identified to cover the GRSFIF salary differential percentage
(including related benefits) to be added to the General Fund portion of the GRSFIF
position. The source of non-state funds cannot be a direct charge to the grant.
The Provost will fund the additional salary necessary for the GRSFIF classification
appointment. Support of GRSFIF awards are contingent upon annual allocation of
funds for this purpose to the Provost’s office.
3. Application Process
A. No later than March 15 in the academic year before the requested GRSFIF
appointment year, the faculty member applies in writing for the GRSFIF classification
appointment by submitting a letter to the Dean, copied to the Department Chair. The
application may request a specific differential percentage and must address the
GRSFIF classification appointment’s eligibility criteria listed in section III.1.A-F. GRSFIF
appointments are subject to funding availability.
B. The applicant’s Departmental Evaluation Committee (described in FAM 300, 315) will
review the application and prepare an evaluation letter. The letter should include the
names of the panel chair and other faculty panel members, and be submitted to the
Dean and Chair no later than April 1. The evaluation should include whether the
GRSFIF applicant is a demonstrably distinguished faculty member who meets criteria
1.C and 1.D. above, and whether the panel recommends approval of the GRSFIF
appointment.

133

C. The application documents are reviewed by the Department Chair who submits a
recommendation, no later than April 15, copied to the applicant, which includes a review
of the criteria listed above and a recommendation for approval or denial of the GRSFIF
appointment.
D. The application and recommendations from the review panel and Department Chair
is reviewed by the College Dean. The Dean submits a letter of recommendation, no
later than May 1, to the Provost and Vice President for Academic Affairs, copied to the
applicant, that confirms the identified sources of funding and, if the College Dean
supports the appointment, he or she recommends a specific GRSFIF salary differential.
E. The Provost and Vice President for Academic Affairs, in consultation with the
Associate Provost for Research, reviews the application letter and recommendations
from the Department and College-level reviewers and approves or denies the GRSFIF
appointment and the amount of the GRSFIF salary differential. The Provost’s decision
to approve or deny a GRSFIF appointment is final. The Provost communicates his or
her decision to the applicant by letter, no later than May 15, with copies to the College
Dean and Department Chair.
4. Terms of Appointment
A. Appointments to this classification are not permanent and shall be made for only one
academic year (for academic year instructional faculty) or one 12-month period (for 12month instructional faculty).
B. Appointees to these classifications shall receive compensation comprising the base
salary of their normal faculty appointment plus a salary augmentation within the range
specified for GRSFIF. The letter of appointment from the Provost shall state the amount
of the differential salary.
1. Changes in compensation during the course of a GRSFIF appointment shall be limited
to any general salary increase, service salary increase, promotion as determined by the
campus retention, tenure, and promotion process or any other contractual compensation
adjustment granted to the faculty member during this time.
2. When the appointment to a GRSFIF position concludes, the faculty member shall
revert back to the salary classification of his or her prior faculty position with any
intervening salary adjustments.
3. In addition to responsibilities as a GRSFIF faculty member, the GRSFIF faculty
member shall also have normal Departmental, College, and University service
responsibilities expected of all other faculty in their regular
Appointments.

134

4. No tenure or salary rights attach to either GRSFIF classification separate from
the tenure rights and salary normally accruing from regular full-time faculty
appointment. Appointment to this temporary classification does not constitute
a promotion nor does its termination without renewal constitute a demotion.
The GRSFIF classification appointment does not adjust base salary in
determining General Salary Increases, Service Salary Increases, Merit Salary
Increases, etc. nor the base salary for retirement purposes.
5. GRSFIF appointments shall begin on the first day of the Academic Year as
follows: September 15 for applicants on Academic Year appointments or
September 1 for those on 12-month appointments. The end date for
academic year appointments shall be the last day of the following Spring
quarter. The end date for 12-month appointments shall be the day prior to the
first day of the following Fall quarter.
6. There is no automatic renewal of a GRSFIF appointment.

FAM 642.56
JOINT FACULTY APPOINTMENTS
FAM 642.5 Grant Related Specially Funded Faculty Appointments (GRIF)
Table of Contents
Purpose and Scope 1
Definition 1
Policy Statement 2
Procedures for Appointing New Faculty for Joint Appointment 2
Procedures for Appointing Tenure-Line Faculty to Joint Appointment 3
Letters of Appointment for Joint Appointment 3
Work Assignment and Support for Joint Appointees 4
Evaluation 4
Subsequent Appointment in a Single Department 5
Approvals 6
History 6
Purpose and Scope
This policy sets forth the guidelines and process for tenure-line faculty to obtain joint
appointments in more than one academic department either when they are first appointed or
during their service at the university.
Definition

135

1. The term "department" in this policy shall mean an academic department withinthe
Division of Academic Affairs.
2. "Faculty member" shall mean a tenure-line (both probationary and
tenured) instructional faculty member.
3. "Administratively responsible department" refers to the primary department of a faculty
member holding a joint appointment.
Policy Statement
A temporary shift in the distribution of work load between departments is not grounds for
reassigning the faculty member to another department.
A faculty member on a joint appointment is not to be considered a part-time faculty member in
each department involved, but rather shall be considered a full-time faculty member by all
departments.
At the end of a joint appointment, the appointee has the option to request an extension of the
appointment or appointment in one department.
The department involved in a joint appointment may be in more than one college.
Procedures for Appointing New Faculty for Joint Appointment
Departments which wish to recruit faculty for joint appointment between two or more
departments shall do so using the same procedures for requesting authorization to recruit for
tenure-line faculty as department requesting such authorization for regular faculty
appointments. The search process shall also conform to existing University policies and
procedures governing faculty recruitment with these additional requirements in the case of
joint appointments.
1. The Search Committee shall be composed of an equal number of tenured faculty
representatives from each of the departments within which the joint appointment will
be made.
2. Recommendations of candidate(s) for joint appointment from the Search Committee
shall be accompanied by a recommendation regarding the department that will serve as
the administratively responsible department for the joint appointee and the proportion
of the appointee's position to be assigned to each department.
3. The pertinent dean(s) shall make a (joint) recommendation to the Provost and Vice
President for Academic Affairs regarding the administratively responsible department
after appropriate consultation with the affected departments.

136

4. In order for a new joint appointment to be made with tenure, the evaluation
committees of the affected departments shall evaluate the appointee using the criteria
and standards in the Procedures and Criteria for Performance Review and Periodic
Evaluation and make a recommendation. If any of the department involved recommend
against appointment with tenure, the joint appointment can only be a probationary one.
If all of the recommendations are positive, the recommendations are forwarded to the
Provost and Vice President for Academic Affairs. The President or designee shall make
the final decision on appointment with tenure.
Procedures for Appointing Current Faculty to Joint Appointment
Any tenure-line faculty may request a joint appointment. The process of approval is as follows.
1. A memorandum by-the faculty requesting the joint appointment shall be sent to the
dean(s} of the affected college(s}. This memorandum shall contain a description of the
individual 's academic qualifications for such an appointment, a statement detailing the
role of the prospective joint appointee in the educational and professional program(s}
to which they will be assigned, and the proportion of their position to be assigned to
each department, and the department which will serve as their administratively
responsible department.
2. The dean(s} shall forward this memorandum to the pertinent departments, including
the department in which the prospective joint appointee currently holds appointment,
for the consideration of their respective tenure-line faculty and chairs.
3. The appropriate department chairs shall then review the request with the tenure-line
members of their respective department. Each department shall vote on whether to
recommend or not recommend the joint appointment. All tenure-line faculty members
in a department shall be eligible to vote. The vote shall be conducted by secret ballot
and requires an affirmative vote of an absolute majority of the tenure-line members of
the department for a positive recommendation of the joint appointment. [Note: an
absolute majority in this context means more than 50% of all tenure-line members of
the department irrespective of whether they cast a valid ballot.] If any of the involved
department do not agree to the joint appointment, the request shall not be approved. If
all involved department approve of the joint appointment, their positive
recommendations shall be sent to the college dean(s}. This recommendation, if positive,
shall include a recommendation regarding the department which will serve as the
administratively responsible department for the joint appointee and the proportion of
the appointee's position to be assigned to each department.
4. The college dean(s} shall then consider the recommendations of the involved
department and, following consultation with the pertinent department, shall forward
their recommendation(s} and those of the department to the Provost and Vice President

137

for Academic Affairs. The Provost and Vice President for Academic Affairs shall make
the final decision on whether to approve the joint appointment.
Letters of Appointment for Joint Appointment
In addition to the material included in letters of faculty appointment under existing University
and California State University system policies, the following shall be inserted into the letters of
faculty appointment given to joint appointees:
1. The proportion of the appointee's position assigned to each department shall be
specified. In the case of a tenured faculty member at this university who subsequently
receives a joint appointment, the appointment letter shall state whether the
appointment is permanent or for a specified number of years.
2. The administratively responsible department shall be specified.
3. The appointee shall be informed that the proportion of their teaching assignment in
their respective departments may vary from semester to semester within the limits of
their appointment.
4. The appointee shall be informed of the right to participate fully as a member of the
faculty in each of the department in which the appointment is held. However, the joint
appointee may vote from only the administratively responsible department in collegewide or university-wide elections. Similarly, the joint appointee may only serve on
college-wide or university wide committees from the college in which the
administratively responsible department is located.
Work Assignment and Support for Joint Appointees
Faculty receiving joint appointments shall receive all of the professional benefits accorded to
other members of the faculty. In addition, the following considerations apply:
1. The chair of the administratively responsible department shall be responsible for
coordinating and administering the scheduled work load for the joint appointee as well
as arranging for their office accommodations. The sources for such accommodation and
support shallbe determined in consultation with the other pertinent department(s) and
dean(s).
2. The participation of jointly appointed faculty in the faculty governance processes
within
their respective departments and college(s) is encouraged. However, joint appointees
should discuss the nature and extent of their participation with the chairs of their
respective departments and the appropriate dean(s). A balance should be soughtwhich

138

will not impose more demands for service on joint appointees than falls upon regularly
appointed faculty of equivalent rank and tenure status.
Evaluation
1. Departmental Evaluation. In the year when a joint appointee is scheduled to be
evaluated, there shall be established one department evaluation committee for the
purpose of performing periodic evaluation or performance review of a jointly appointed
faculty member.
a. The committee shall consist of three members selected by lot from among the
department evaluation committees of the departments within which the candidate
holds a joint appointment.
b. As closely as possible, each department shall be represented on the
committee in equal proportion to the proportion of the appointee's position
assigned to each department.
c. For performance review, a joint department chair recommendation shall be
prepared by the relevant chairs.
2. College Evaluation. If a joint appointment involves two or more Colleges, a joint
College-level evaluation committee shall be established {when needed) for performance
review.
a. The committee shall consist of four members selected by lot from among the
evaluation committees of the Colleges within which the candidate holdsa joint
appointment.
b. As closely as possible, each College shall be represented on the committee
inequal proportion to the proportion of the appointee's position assigned to each
College.
The dean's recommendation shall be prepared by the dean of the
administratively responsible College after consultation with the dean{s) of the
other college(s) involved.
Subsequent Appointment in a Single Department
1. A joint appointee tenure-line without prior membership in any of the departments may
subsequently request appointment in only one of those departments. Such an
appointment shall be requested in the following way: A memorandum requesting the
appointment shall be sent to the dean of the affected college. This memorandum shall
contain a description of the individual's academic qualifications for such an appointment

139

along with a statement detailing the role of the prospective appointee in the
educational and professional program to which they will be assigned.
2. The dean shall forward this memorandum to the pertinent department, including the
departments in which the prospective appointee currently holds a joint appointment,
for the consideration of their respective tenure-line faculty.
3. The departments being consulted shall forward a recommendation on the request to
the dean(s). A positive recommendation forwarded from the department must follow
the voting procedures described above.
4. After receiving their recommendations, and following consultation with the pertinent
department, the dean(s) shall forward their recommendation(s) and those of the faculty
to the Provost and Vice President for Academic Affairs for final decision.
A faculty member who held a full-time tenured or probationary appointment in a single
department prior to being given a joint appointment between that department and
another department may request and be granted a full-time appointment in his or her
original department by the above procedure, but may be appointed fully to the other
department only by following the Policy Concerning Departmental Transfer.

FAM 642.76
RECRUITING AND APPOINTMENT OF LECTURERS
FAM 642.56 Joint Faculty Appointments

Purpose and Scope
Many academic departments (or schools) and programs require lecturers to meet their
instructional needs. This document sets forth the process and policies for the initial
appointment of lecturers, i.e. the hiring of new lecturers. It does not govern subsequent
appointments of lecturers, i.e. the continuing hiring of those lecturers who have taught at
CSUSB in the previous year(s).
Definitions
1. Department: Department or school.
2. Department Chair: Chair of a department or director of a school.
Policy Statement
The hiring of lecturers by an academic department or school shall be the responsibility of the
department chair, assisted by the Lecturer Recruiting Committee (below) and in collaboration
with the Office of Faculty Affairs and Development and/or Human Resources. The hiring of
140

lecturers by a college shall be the responsibility of the dean (or designee) in collaboration with
Faculty Affairs and Development and/or Human Resources.
The hiring of lecturers is normally done in two steps: the establishing and maintaining of a
candidate pool and the appointment of lecturers from that pool.
To screen applicants for the candidate pool, the department may elect a Lecturer Recruiting
Committee of at least three {3) tenure-line faculty or charge its Evaluation Committee with this
task. In the event the department does not have three (3) tenure-line faculty, it may elect
tenure-line faculty from closely related fields. The Lecturer Recruiting Committee shall elect its
chair.
There may be situations in which the process and policies stipulated in this document cannot be
strictly followed or situations in which there arises a specific and unforeseeable need in an
department for the hiring of a lecturer. In such situations, the department shall consult with the
Office of Faculty Affairs and Development for a mutually accepted process.
CANDIDATE POOL
The candidate pool is established and maintained based on the following:
1. Vacancy Announcement. Vacancy announcements, drafted by the department and
approved by the college dean and the Office of Faculty Affairs and Development,
are normally distributed to nearby colleges and universities and relevant
professional organizations.
2. Required Application Documents. A candidate's file must minimally contain
a. contact information,
b. curriculum vitae,
c. a cover letter,
d. a statement on diversity, equity, and inclusion, and
e. any other information deemed necessary by the Lecturer Recruiting Committee.
Upon the receipt of the application packet, the candidate is requested to submit the
Biographical Statement and the Affirmative Action Statistical Data Form (AA-1}.
3. Decision to Include a Candidate in the Pool. The head of the department shall conduct
the first screening of candidates. Those candidates who meet the minimum
qualifications are further reviewed by the Lecturer Recruiting Committee.
The Office of Faculty Affairs and Development shall maintain a record of the demographic
breakdown of the applicant pool.
APPOINTMENT
1. Process. To hire a lecturer, the chair of the department shall select the most qualified
candidate from the candidate pool consistent with Article 12 of the Collective Bargaining
Agreement (CBA}, arrange an on-campus interview, and-if necessary-conduct

141

telephone checks to ascertain the candidate's qualifications. The department chair shall
then forward the successful candidate's file-with all information gathered to that
point-to the college dean for approval and appointment.
2. Documentation. Before appointing a lecturer, the dean should obtain three letters of
recommendation and transcripts for all post-secondary degrees from the candidate and
proof of satisfactory background check from the central administration. The eventual
file of the newly-appointed lecturer should include:
a. Biographical statement and vita.
b. Copies of transcripts for all post-secondary degrees.
c. Three (3} letters of recommendation.
d. Student evaluations of teaching or other evidence of teaching effectiveness (if
available}.
e. Notes from telephone inquiries (if applicable}.
f. Lecturer Recruiting Committee' recommendation.
g. Recommendation by the department chair.

3. Terms of Appointment
a. The appointment of a lecture can vary from one term to more than one
academic year based on the needs of the department and consistent with the
CBA.
b. The employment of lecturers, regardless of the period of appointment, shall be
contingent upon the enrollment of the class(es) and the availability of funds.
c. A class taught by a lecturer may be cancelled any time prior to the third-class
meeting. In such a case, the lecturer shall be paid for the hours the class has
been taught.
4. Salary. The salary for the appointed lecturer shall be based on prior experience and
be consistent with Article 12 of the CBA.

FAM 642.85
APPOINTMENT OF VISITING PROFESSORS,
DISTINGUISHED VISITING PROFESSORS,
ADJUNCT PROFESSORS AND VISITING SCHOLARS
FAM 642.85 Appointment of Visiting Professors

Introduction:

142

The appointment of visiting professors, distinguished visiting professors, adjunct professors,
and visiting scholars is for the purpose of bringing to the campus individuals of special scholarly
and/or professional interest and merit.
Appointment Process (Visiting Professors):
Upon the recommendation of a department/school recruiting committee and the College Dean,
the University may appoint temporary full-time faculty with the honorary rank of Visiting
Assistant/Associate Professor or Professor. Recommendations for such appointments must be
justified by the faculty member's previous experience; special area of expertise; or particular
circumstances such as leaves replacements, exchange faculty, foreign scholars, etc. The term of
appointment for visiting professors may be for a term or more but not to exceed a single
academic year.
Appointment Process (Distinguished Visiting Professors):
Upon the recommendation of the College Deans to the Vice President for Academic
Affairs/Provost and following consultation with Department Chairs/School Directors and
appropriate faculty members, the University may appoint noted individuals as Distinguished
Visiting Professors. Positions for such appointments would be assigned campus-wide and
therefore not be charged against any particular academic unit. Positions would rotate among
Colleges from year to year and the intention is for all segments of the campus to share the
educational benefits.
The Dean's recommendation should include:
1. Justification for the appointment with supporting documentation in the form of vita, letters
of recommendations, publications and other evidence of distinction.
2. Planned assignments (teaching; lectures/seminars for campus and community;
consulting for curricular planning, professional society’s relations, accreditation,
faculty professional development, etc.)
3. Academic Year and term of appointment
4. Rank and Step (at the professor level with step to be negotiated).
Appointment Process (Adjunct Professors):

143

Upon the recommendation of a department recruiting committee and the College Dean, the
University may appoint individuals of particular expertise as Adjunct Professors. Such
individuals may teach courses without compensation and participate in an advisory capacity in
the curricular, programmatic, and community activities of the department. The term of
appointment for adjunct professors may be for a year or more, but not to exceed five years.
Appointment Process (Visiting Scholar):
Upon the recommendation of a department and College Dean to the Vice President for
Academic Affairs/Provost, a scholar or researcher may be granted the honorary rank of
visiting scholar for a period not to exceed one year. Such a visiting scholar would not be
paid a salary or have any official responsibilities but would receive
1. An office, desk and appropriate accoutrement
2. Library privileges
3. Suitable social amenities
4. Scholarly and technical assistance when possible
5. Parking privileges

FAM 643.4
APPOINTMENT OF GRADUATE ASSISTANTS
FAM 643.4 Appointment of Graduate Assistants

Nature of the Position:
The Graduate Assistant position is intended to:
1) Provide graduate students with part-time employment offering practical
experience in fields related to their advanced study;
2) Provide professional non-teaching assistance to faculty members.
Graduate Assistants may not be assigned full responsibility for a class, but they should be
assigned to assist faculty in the direct instructional program. Graduate Assistants may supervise
students in a classroom, workshop, or laboratory. They may assist in research and help faculty
prepare course materials and evaluate students' work. They may tutor. Graduate Assistants are
not to be responsible for the instructional content of a course, for selection of student

144

assignments, for planning examinations, or for determining the term grade for students, nor are
they to be assigned responsibility for instructing the entire enrollment of a course, or for
providing the entire instruction of a group of students enrolled in a course.
Graduate Assistants must be enrolled 5th year or graduate students.
Nature of the Appointment:
Although a "full-time" Graduate Assistantship is intended to require approximately 20
hours per week, Graduate Assistants should be assigned responsibilities without regard
to the specific number of hours required, in the same manner as faculty. Advertisements
for Graduate Assistants should stress that the salary is a stipend for work during the
academic year or term and is not an hourly rate. The full stipend is earned upon
completion of the work required and the faculty member's certification of such
completion. Appropriate appointment fractions for Graduate Assistants are 1/4, 1/2, 3/4
and full time.
Funding:
Graduate Assistants are appointed from faculty salary funds through the conversion of
regular positions to Graduate Assistant positions. Systemwide policy limits such
conversions to a total of 2% of the University's faculty budget.
Procedure for Appointment:
To appoint a Graduate Assistant, the College Dean should:
1. Set up a folder which includes:
a. Biographical Statement
2. Send a completed Graduate Assistant Appointment Form to the Office of Academic
Personnel for approval and processing.
Procedures for Terminating and Replacing:
To terminate a Graduate Assistant before the expiration of his term of appointment, the
College Dean should send a memo to the Personnel Office stating when the
appointment is to be terminated and the reason for the termination. Replacements may
be appointed (FSA 79-33, Sup. No. 1), but the reason for such action must be so noted in the
Graduate Assistant Appointment form.

145

FAM 256/650.5
POLICY CONCERNING PERIODIC REVIEW OF
ACADEMIC AFFAIRS CENTRAL ADMINISTRATORS
FAM 650.5 Review of AA Central Admin.pdf

1. Purpose
Periodic reviews of the Academic Affairs Central Administrators are designed to appraise the
administrator's leadership, conduct of office including management of subsidiary administrative
offices, establishment of objectives and attainment of administrative goals. Those Academic
Affairs Central Administrators to be reviewed are those who deal most directly with the faculty
and includes but not necessarily limited to Associate Vice Presidents, Associate Provosts, the
Dean of Undergraduate Studies, the Dean of Graduate Studies and Research, the Dean of
Extended Education, the Dean of the Palm Desert Campus, as well as any other position which
may be deemed related in the future. The review process shall represent a cooperative effort by
representatives from faculty, students, staff and administration. These periodic reviews are
regarded as constructive and are designed to maintain a sense of collegiality among all persons
directly involved with the office being reviewed.
2. Scheduling
Scheduling of all periodic reviews of Academic Affairs Central Administrators shall be
the responsibility of the Vice President for Academic Affairs/Provost. An initial periodic review of
the Academic Affairs Central Administrators shall occur after three years of service. Thereafter,
a periodic review shall normally occur every five years unless an early review is called for by
special request. Special requests for reviews shall be approved by the Vice President for
Academic Affairs/Provost. Circumstances warranting a special request must be compelling.
Special requests shall be made in writing to the Vice President for Academic Affairs/Provost and
shall state clearly and in detail the specific reason(s) for the request.
3. Review Panel
3.1 General Provisions
The review panel shall consist of seven or eight members who shall be
representative of the constituencies having a direct relationship with the
Academic Affairs Central Administrator under review. Other Academic
Affairs Central Administrators may be consulted.
3.2 Panel Selection
3.2.1 Five tenured faculty members, one from each College shall be elected.
Elections officers shall conduct the election of these members. Elections shall be
held in a timely fashion.

146

3.2.2 In the case of the Dean of Undergraduate Studies, the Dean of Graduate
Studies and Research, or the Dean of the Palm Desert Campus, one student,
undergraduate or graduate, who shall be a full-time student during the period in
which the review takes place. This student shall be selected by the Academic
Affairs Central Administrator who is to be reviewed from a list of at least two
submitted by the President of the Associated Student Body.
3.2.3 One non-academic staff member who has permanent status within the
University, who has a position within the Division of Academic Affairs, and who
has a direct working relationship that is not immediately subordinate to the
administrator under review. This member shall be selected by the Vice President
for Academic Affairs/Provost from a list of three submitted by the Academic
Affairs Central Administrator to be reviewed.
3.2.4 The Vice President for Academic Affairs/Provost may appoint additional
members of the review panel to reflect such concerns as, but not limited
to, community interests, diversity goals, or specific program
constituencies.
3.2.5 Regardless of the size of the final committee, the majority of members
shall be from the academic community.
4. Charge to the Review Panel
4.1 The review panel shall consider the performance of the Academic Affairs
Central Administrator in the context of the diverse activities of the position. This
shall include but may not be limited to the objectives, goals and expectations for
leadership and management of the position including the supervisory
relationships with subordinates. As part of the review process the panel shall
assess the strengths as well as weaknesses of the performance of the Academic
Affairs Central Administrator and evaluate that individual's overall effectiveness in
terms of relationships with the University as a whole.
4.2 Areas of Evaluation
To assist the review panel in its deliberations, the following items are
suggested for consideration. These suggestions should not be taken as
limiting, definitive or prescriptive in order. During the process of review,
the panel may find areas to be reviewed not specifically noted here. The
review panel shall remain free to expand, select from, add to or condense
this list of suggestions.
4.2.1 Leadership

147

Does the Academic Affairs Central Administrator provide effective
leadership in her or his primary areas of responsibilities?
4.2.2 Professional Relationships
Does the Academic Affairs Central Administrator maintain effective
professional relationships with faculty, students, staff members
related to this position, and with the off-campus community as
Appropriate?
4.2.3 Assigned Tasks
Does the Academic Affairs Central Administrator carry out and
complete assigned tasks in a timely and satisfactory manner?
4.2.4 Managerial and Fiscal Skills
Does the Academic Affairs Central Administrator effectively
manage the administrative affairs of this office with respect to
planning, fiscal matters and personnel?
5. Review Panel Procedures
5.1 The first meeting of the review panel shall be called by the Vice President
for Academic Affairs/Provost. At this meeting, the review panel shall elect
its chairperson.
5.2 The review panel shall proceed as follows:
5.2.1 Request the Central Administrator under review to prepare and submit a
self-study document. The self-study should include the following:
(a) A listing and brief discussion of primary areas of administrative
responsibility. Specific references should be made to goals established at
the time of appointment or following subsequent reviews and notes of
changes mutually agreed upon with the Vice President for Academic
Affairs/Provost.
(b) A listing and brief discussion of the most significant achievements as a
Central Administrator since appointment or last review.
(c) A listing and brief discussion of major goals for the unit during the next
five years.
(d) A listing and brief discussion of administrative strengths which relate
to administrative responsibilities.
(e) A listing and brief discussion of competencies which the Central

148

Administrator would like to strengthen or develop.
(f) A response to prior review committee recommendations.
5.2.2 Request the Central Administrator to identify constituencies that should
be surveyed or contacted as the review committee deems desirable.
5.2.3 Prepare and distribute a survey instrument to these constituencies as
appropriate. The survey instrument should include questions that relate to
the Central Administrator's primary areas of responsibility.
See Attachment A for a sample survey instrument.
5.2.4 Announce to these constituencies the schedule for personal interviews
and open forums, and announce that signed written statements are also
acceptable.
5.2.5 Interview the Central Administrator and provide to her or him the
opportunity to discuss with the panel any major issues or specific concerns which
may have arisen during the review process and to provide any additional
information needed by the Panel.
6. The Report, its Use and Distribution:
6.1 The review panel shall prepare a written report which shall contain the following:
(a) An executive summary.
(b) An analysis of the Central Administrator's self-study.
(c) An analysis of the survey results.
(d) An analysis of all other information obtained from open forums, interviews,and
written statements.
(e) A comparison of accomplishments to goals.
(f) Recommendations concerning changes the Central Administrator should
undertake with respect to all of the areas evaluated in Section 4.2.
Additional recommendations may be made concerning the Central
Administrator's office organizational structure; functions undertaken in the
Central Administrator's office; budgetary, personnel and other processes;
and any other relevant issues.
6.2 The review panel shall then meet with the Vice President for Academic
Affairs/Provost University to present and discuss the report. Upon acceptance of the

149

report by the Vice President for Academic Affairs/Provost, the review panel's work shall
be completed. However, the panel may be called upon for clarification of portions of the
report that may not be clear.
6.3 Following this meeting and discussion, the Vice President for Academic
Affairs/Provost shall provide a copy of the report to the Academic Affairs
Central Administrator.
6.4 After review of the report, and within a reasonable period of time, the Vice President
for Academic Affairs/Provost shall meet with the Academic Affairs Central Administrator
and discuss the findings of the review panel and the specific recommendations.
____________________________________________________________________________
Attachment A
SAMPLE SURVEY INSTRUMENT
Does the Central Administrator:
1. provide effective leadership in his/her primary areas of responsibility?
2. maintain effective professional relationships with faculty, students, staff members
related to the position, and with the off-campus community as appropriate?
3. carry out and complete assigned tasks in a timely and satisfactory manner?
4. effectively manage the administrative affairs of the office with respect to planning, fiscal
matters and personnel?
5. encourage a collegial environment for decision making?
6. operate within established university policies, procedures, and expectations?
7. support diversity in personnel matters?
8. represent the university effectively outside the university?
9. manage an efficient and professional office?
10. maintain currency in knowledge of respective areas of responsibility?
These questions may be modified as appropriate and additional questions added to
address issues specific to the primary functions of the central administrator being
reviewed.
Responses to these queries may consist of marking one of the following
categories: strongly agree, agree, uncertain, disagree, or not enough information.

150

FAM 650.7
POLICY STATEMENT CONCERNING PERIODIC REVIEW
OF THE VICE PRESIDENT FOR ACADEMIC AFFAIRS/PROVOST
FAM 650.7 Review of VP of AA and Provost
1. Purpose
Periodic reviews of the Vice President for Academic Affairs/Provost are designed to
appraise the administrator's leadership, conduct of office including management of
subsidiary administrative offices, establishment of objectives and attainment of
academic and administrative goals. The review process shall represent a cooperative
effort by representatives from faculty, students, staff and administration. These periodic
reviews are regarded as constructive and are designed to maintain a sense of
collegiality among all persons directly involved with the office being reviewed.
2. Scheduling
Scheduling of all periodic reviews of the Vice President for Academic Affairs/Provost
shall be the responsibility of the Office of the President of the University.
An initial periodic review of the Vice President for Academic Affairs/Provost shall occur
after three years of service. Thereafter, a periodic review shall normally occur every five
years unless an early review is called for by special request.
Special requests for reviews shall be approved by the President of the University.
Circumstances warranting a special request must be compelling. Special requests shall
be made in writing to the President of the University and shall state clearly and in detail
the specific reason(s) for the request.
3. Review Panel
3.1 General Provisions
The review panel shall consist of at least eight members who shall be representative of
the constituents having a direct relationship with the Vice President for Academic
Affairs/Provost.
The review panel shall be assisted in an active consultative role by the five College
Deans and the Associate Vice Presidents for Academic Personnel and Academic
Programs. At the discretion of the review panel, other members of the University
community may be consulted.
3.2 Panel Selection
3.2.1 Five tenured faculty members, one from each College shall be
151

elected. Elections officers shall conduct the elections of these members.
Elections must be held in a timely fashion and may not take longer than
three weeks.
3.2.2 One administrative representative from this campus shall be
appointed by the President of the University. This member shall be
selected from a list of at least two nominees submitted by the Vice
President for Academic Affairs/Provost who is to be reviewed. This
member must be an area administrator.
3.2.3 One student, undergraduate or graduate, who shall be a full-time
student during the period in which the review takes place. This member
shall be selected by the President from a list of at least two nominees
submitted by the President of the Associated Student Body.
3.2.4 One non-academic staff member who has permanent status within
the University and must have a position which is related to the Office of
the Vice President for Academic Affairs/Provost. This member shall be
selected by the President of the University from a list of three nominees
submitted by the Vice President for Academic Affairs/Provost to be
reviewed.
3.2.5 The President of the University may appoint additional members to
the review panel to reflect such concerns as, but not limited to, community
interest, diversity goals or specific program constituencies.
If additional members are appointed to the review panel, the final
composition normally shall consist of a majority of faculty members, and
the total size of the committee shall not exceed 11 members.
4. Charge to the Review Panel
4.1 Review
The review panel shall consider the performance of the Vice President for
Academic Affairs/Provost in the context of the broad range of the diverse
activities of the position. This shall include but may not be limited to the
objectives, goals and expectations for leadership and management of the
position including the supervisory relationships with the Colleges and any
subsidiary offices. As part of the review process the panel shall assess the
strengths as well as weaknesses of the performance of the Vice President for
Academic Affairs/Provost and evaluate that individual's overall effectiveness in
terms of relationships with the University as a whole.
4.2 Areas of Evaluation
To assist the review panel in its deliberations, the following items are suggested for
consideration. During the process of review, the panel may find areas to be reviewed
not specifically noted here. The review panel shall remain free to expand on this list of
suggestions.

152

4.2.1 Leadership
Does the Vice President for Academic Affairs/Provost provide effective
leadership in the following areas: faculty recruitment, development and
evaluation; student retention; curriculum development; educational equity and
diversity programs; and in any other areas related to leadership skills required of
this position?
4.2.2 Professional Relationships
Does the Vice President for Academic Affairs/Provost maintain effective
professional relationships with faculty, students, staf fmembers related to this
position, and with the off-campus community?
4.2.3 Supervision Skills
Does the Vice President for Academic Affairs/Provost provide
effective supervision of the following: College deans, staff of the
Office of Academic Affairs, and subsidiary offices, such as Dean of
Extended Education, Dean of Undergraduate Studies, Dean of
Graduate Studies and Research, and the Associate Vice
Presidents for Academic Personnel and Academic Programs?
Other positions under the directions of this office, which may be
added in the future, shall also be included.
4.2.4 Managerial and Fiscal Skills
Does the Vice President for Academic Affairs/Provost effectively
manage the administrative affairs of this office with respect to
planning, fiscal matters and personnel?
5. Review Panel Procedures
5.1 The First meeting of the review panel shall be called by the President of the
University. At this meeting, the review panel shall elect its chairperson.
5.2 The review panel shall assemble the following items: the published job description
of the office, any available data or materials which define the responsibilities of the Vice
President for Academic Affairs/Provost, descriptive statements of the relationship
between the Vice President for Academic Affairs/Provost and any subsidiary offices
solicited from the holders of the subsidiary office, and a self-study solicited from the
Vice President for Academic Affairs/Provost. These materials shall be solicited from the
appropriate persons and a deadline for their receipt shall be given.

153

5.3 The review panel shall ensure that all members of the University community who
are directly involved with the Vice President for Academic Affairs/Provost, are
represented by members of the review panel, shall be given the opportunity to
communicate with the panel. These shall include faculty, students, staff, and
administrators.
5.4 The means whereby the members of the University community communicate with
the review panel shall be determined by the panel. Written statements, personal
interviews, and open forums may by employed.
5.5 The review panel shall provide the Vice President for Academic Affairs/Provost
and opportunity to discuss with the panel any major issues which may arise and any
specific concerns identified during the review process.
6. The Report, Its Use and Distribution
6.1 The review panel shall prepare a written report which shall contain a description of
the review process, of the data collected, and of the solicited materials including results
of the interviews. The report shall include specific recommendations for future action by
the Vice President for Academic Affairs/Provost.
6.2 The review panel shall then meet with the President of the University to present and
discuss the report.
6.3 After this discussion, a copy of the report shall be presented to the Vice President
for Academic Affairs/Provost.
6.4 Upon acceptance of the report, and within a reasonable period of time, the
President of the University shall meet with the Vice President for Academic
Affair/Provosts to discuss the findings of the review panel and the specific
recommendations.

FAM 651.3
PERIODIC REVIEW OF ACADEMIC DEANS
FAM 651.3 - Periodic Review of Academic Deans
Purpose and Scope
The policy described herein governs the periodic review of the university's deans of academic
colleges: Colleges of Arts and Letters, the Jack H. Brown College of Business and Public
154

Administration, College of Education, College of Natural Sciences, and College of Social and
Behavioral Sciences. It is not meant to be applicable to the review of other positions bearing
the title of dean, such as that of the Dean of the College of Extended and Global Education,
Dean of the Palm Desert Campus, the Dean of Undergraduate Studies, the Dean of Graduate
studies, or the Dean of Students.
Policy Statement
Periodic reviews of College Deans are designed to renew the understandings among the
various constituencies of a College regarding a Dean's leadership, conduct of office,
establishment of objectives and attainment of administrative goals. The review process shall
represent a cooperative effort by representatives from faculty, students, staff and
administration. These periodic reviews are regarded as constructive and designed to maintain
a sense of collegiality among all persons directly involved with the dean being reviewed.
Procedure and Process
1. Scheduling
Scheduling of all periodic reviews of College Deans shall be the responsibility of the
Provost and Vice President for Academic Affairs .
Periodic Review:_An initial periodic review of a College Dean shall occur after three
years of service. Thereafter, a periodic review shall norma lly occur every five years
unless an early review is called for by special request.
Early Review:_An early review of a college dean can occur at any time during the term of
the dean. An early review can be called for in two ways. First, the Provost and Vice
President for Academic Affairs may call for a review of any college dean at any time.
Secondly, college faculty may request an early review of their dean using the following
procedure :
a. Faculty may write a letter to the Provost and Vice President for Academic Affairs
requesting an early review of the dean. The letter must include the reasons or
rationale for holding the review and the signatures of over 20% faculty members of
the college faculty making the request. A faculty member may sign only one letter in
an academic calendar year.
b. Within thirty {30) days of receiving the letter, the Provost and Vice President for
Academic Affairs, after having conferred with the dean, will respond in writing to the
requesting faculty as to why or why not the review will move forward .
c. If the request for review is not granted, the faculty members may appeal to the
Faculty Senate by requesting that a vote be taken by the tenured-line faculty of the
college.
d. The Chair of the Faculty Senate will contact the University Elections Officer to

155

conduct the election. If the University Elections Officer resides in the college in
question, the Chair of the Faculty Senate, in consultation with the Senate's Executive
Committee, shall appoint an Elections Officer to conduct the election and complete
it within 45 days.
If over 50% of the tenure-line faculty of the college vote in favor of holding an early
review, the review will proceed. An eligible faculty member who does not vote will
be counted as a no vote.
2. Review Committee
a. General Provisions
The review committee shall consist of eight (8) members (A chair from outside the
college and seven (7) members representative of the constituencies within the
college).
The Associate Vice Presidents for Faculty Affairs and Development and Academic
Programs and other appropriate Academic Affairs administrators may serve as
resource persons for the review committee. At the discretion of the review
committee, other members of the university community may be consulted.
b. Review Committee Selection
The chair of the committee will be appointed by the Provost and Vice President for
Academic Affairs from outside the college. It is the responsibility of the chair of the
review committee and Provost and Vice President for Academic Affairs to ensure
that the review is conducted in accordance with this policy . Should there be a
procedural concern, it should be conveyed in writing to the Chair of the review
committee and Provost and Vice President for Academic Affairs.
i. Five tenured faculty members elected from the college whose Dean is to be
reviewed . No more than one faculty member shall be elected from each
department . However, if there are fewer than five departments in a college,
department(s) with the largest number of faculty may elect two tenured faculty
members as needed to assure that five tenured faculty members are elected. If
any elections are not completed within forty-five (45) days, the remaining
members of the committee shall be appointed by the Faculty Senate Executive
Committee from a list of nominees from those departments whose elections
were not completed.
ii. One student, undergraduate or graduate, majoring in a subject offered within
the college. Department chairs may forward the name of a student in their
major to the Provost and Vice President for Academic Affairs, along with a brief
explanation why the student was selected. From these student candidates the

156

Provost and Vice President for Academic Affairs will make the final selection.
iii. One permanent staff member in the college who has a working relationship
with but is not directly subordinate to the Dean. This member shall be selected
by the Provost and Vice President for Academic Affairs from a list of all eligible
staff members in the college.
3. Areas of Review
a. General Provisions
The review committee shall consider the broad range of diverse educational
philosophies within the College and its constituent departments; interpret the
objectives, goals and expectations for leadership and management within the
constituencies of the College; assess the strengths as well as the weaknesses of the
performance of the Dean in the role of the principal administrator of the College;
and evaluate the overall effectiveness of the operation of the College as well as its
relationship with the university as a whole. The review committee shall conduct the
evaluation in a fair and equitable manner . All members of the committee must
reveal if they have a conflict of interest with the dean in question and shall recuse
themselves from the committee if one is disclosed. In the end, it is the committee's
responsibility to conduct a fair and unbiased review of the dean in question.
b. Areas of Evaluation
To assist the review committee in its deliberations, the following items are
suggested for consideration. These suggestions should not be taken as limiting,
definitive or prescriptive in order. During the process of review, the committee may
find areas to be reviewed not specifically noted here. The review committee shall
remain free to expand, select from, add to or condense this list of suggestions.
i. Leadership
Does the Dean foster confidence, trust and respect in the area leadership?
Considerations here might include such items as availability for assistance and
consultation, fairness and honesty in dealing with problems, resolution of
conflicts, and other items of a general nature related to leadership, such as
equity and inclusion, integrity, and transparency.
ii. Fiscal Management
Does the Dean maintain the fiscal affairs of the College in an appropriate manner
and keep the faculty informed of the same? Considerations here might include
items such as preparation and maintenance of the budget, allocation of funds,
appropriate purchases and/or repair of equipment, handling of special money
allocations, and other items related to the business of the College.

157

iii. Instruction
Does the Dean maintain appropriate curriculum standards within the College?
Considerations here might include items such as establishment of appropriate
educational policies, assistance in curriculum development, quality control of
instruction, and other items related to curriculum and instruction.
iv. Faculty Relationships
Does the Dean maintain appropriate professional relationships with the
instructional faculty within the College? Considerations here might include items
such as consultative and collegial decision making, performance reviews or
periodic evaluations, recruiting practices, concern regarding the issue of
diversity, handling of problems and complaints, committee work, assistance in
faculty development such as grants and assigned time, and other items related
to the instructional faculty of the College.
v. Student Relationships
Does the Dean maintain appropriate professional relationships with students?
Considerations here might include items such as resolution of registration
problems and practices, acceptable handling of complaints, involvement in
outreach programs, involvement in student evaluation of teaching effectiveness,
availability for advisement and consultation, and other items appropriately
related to students.
vi. Staff Relationships
Does the Dean maintain appropriate professional relationships with the
members of the non-academic staff of the College? Considerations here might
include items such as recruiting practices, concern regarding the issue of
diversity, appropriate work assignments, recognition of job performance,
disciplinary or removal procedures, and other items related to staff.
vii. Administrative Items
Does the Dean handle the administrative affairs of the College in an
appropriately professional manner? Consideration here might be items such as
relationships with Department Chairpersons, interactions with other Deans or
University and/or Central Administrators, and other items which are related to
the administration of the College.
viii. Office Management
Does the Dean maintain a current knowledge of relevant policies and
procedures, follow them appropriately, and carry out day-to-day functions of the
office in an orderly and organized manner. This includes, but is not limited to, the
office organizational structure, allocation of responsibilities to the support staff
and associate dean.

158

a. Process of Review
The first meeting of the review committee shall be called by the Provost and Vice
President for Academic Affairs. The review committee shall proceed as follows:
b. Request a self-study document from the College Dean under review . The self-study
should include the following:
i. A listing and brief discussion of primary areas of administrative responsibility .
Specific references should be made to goals established at the time of
appointment or following subsequent reviews and notes of changes mutually
agreed upon with the Provost and Vice President for Academic Affairs.
ii. A listing and brief discussion of the most significant achievements as a College
Dean since appointment or last review.
iii. A listing and brief discussion of major goals for the College during the next five
years.
iv. A listing and brief discussion of administrative strengths which relate to
administrative responsibilities.
v. A listing and brief discussion of competencies which the College Dean would like
to strengthen or develop.
vi. A response to prior review committee recommendations.
c. Request the College Dean to identify constituencies that should be surveyed or
contacted as the review committee deems desirable.
d. Prepare and distribute a survey instrument to these constituencies as appropriate.
The survey instrument should include questions that relate to the College Dean's
primary areas of responsibility. See Attachment A for a sample survey instrument.
e. Announce to these constituencies the schedule for personal interviews and open
forums, and announce that signed written statements are also acceptable.
f. Interview the College Dean and provide to him or her an opportunity to discuss with
the committee any major issues which may have arisen or any specific concerns
identified during the review process.
5. Structure and Dissemination of the Review Report
a. The review committee shall prepare a written report which shall contain the

159

following:
i. An executive summary.
ii. An analysis of the College Dean's self-study.
iii. An analysis of the survey results.
iv. An analysis of all other information obtained from open forums, interviews, and
written statements.
v. A comparison of accomplishments to goals.
vi. Recommendations concerning changes the College Dean should undertake with
respect to all of the areas evaluated in~ 3.b "Areas of Evaluation" above.
Additional recommendations may be made concerning the College Dean's office
organizational structure; functions undertaken in the College Dean's office;
budgetary, personnel and other processes; and any other relevant issues.
b. The review committee shall then meet with the Provost and Vice President for
Academic Affairs to present and discuss the report. Upon acceptance of the report
by the Provost and Vice President for Academic Affairs, the review committee's
work shall be completed. However, the committee may be called upon for
clarification of the report.
c. Following this meeting and discussion, the Provost and Vice President for Academic
Affairs shall provide a copy of the report to the College Dean.
d. After review of the report and within 10 calendar days after receipt of the report, the
College Dean may submit a response to the report addressing the evaluation. The
response will be submitted to the Provost and Vice President for Academic Affairs. A
copy of the response from the Dean will be shared with the review committee and
the committee will meet with the Provost and Vice President for Academic Affairs to
discuss the response and revisions may be made to the report by the review
committee, if necessary. Upon acceptance of the review committee report
(including revisions, if any), the review committee's work shall be completed.
However, they may be called upon for clarification if portions of that report may not
be clear.
e. The Provost and Vice President for Academic Affairs shall meet with the College
Dean to discuss the findings of the review committee and the specific
recommendations.
f. The Dean shall prepare a five-year plan in response to her or his discussions with the
Provost and Vice President for Academic Affairs regarding the review committee's
findings and recommendations.
g. The Provost and Vice President for Academic Affairs shall then arrange a meeting

160

with the faculty, staff and students of the College whose Dean has been reviewed. In
addition, the executive summary of the review committee will be circulated by the
Provost and Vice President for Academic Affairs to the College. The purpose of this
meeting is to discuss the findings and recommendations of the review committee.
The form which this meeting takes shall be determin~d by the Provost and Vice
President for Academic Affairs but shall ensure that a spectrum of the members
including faculty, students, staff, administrators and others directly involved with the
Dean may attend. At this time, copies of a summary of the report and the Dean's
plan shall be made available to the faculty, staff, and students of the College. Copies
of the report, the response {if any), and plan shall be available in the office of the
Provost and Vice President for Academic Affairs.
Sample Survey Instrument
Does the College Dean:
1. make personnel decisions that improve the quality of faculty in the College?
2. provide leadership in promoting promising educational innovations?
3. provide leadership in encouraging the recruiting of competent and productive faculty?
4. encourage a collegial environment for decision making?
5. establish good working relationships with faculty, staff, students, and external
constituencies?
6. provide assistance to faculty in securing external resources?
7. encourage the development of effective teaching, research, and service?
8. make herself/himself accessible to the faculty?
9. provide for faculty participation in making major decisions?
10. maintain appropriate professional relationship with the staff personnel?
11. represent the interests of the College's faculty to the university administration in a
manner consistent with the overall interests of the university?
12. explain the rationale for major decisions which do not follow faculty recommendations?
13. communicate clearly university policies, procedures, and expectations that affect the
faculty?
14. operate within established policies, procedures, and expectations?
15. allocate human and support resources wisely?
16. support diversity in personnel matters?
17. represent the university effectively to external audiences?
18. manage an efficient and professional College dean's office?
19. work to develop effective plans for the College?
20. make priority decisions for the development of the College?
These questions may be modified and additional questions added as appropriate to address
issues specific to the primary functions of the College Dean.
Responses to these queries may consist of marking one of the following categories: strongly
agree, agree, uncertain, disagree, or not enough information.

161

FAM 651.533 DEPARTMENT OF ACCOUNTING AND FINANCE TENURE‐TRACK
FACULTY RPT EVALUATION GUIDELINES
FAM 651.533 DEPARTMENT OF ACCOUNTING AND FINANCE.pdf

Preamble
In order to achieve greater clarity and consistency in the expectations for tenure‐track faculty to
go through the retention, promotion, and tenure process, the Department of Accounting and
Finance, of the College of Business and Public Administration, agrees on the following
guidelines. These guidelines are set forth in accordance with the relevant CSUSB Faculty
Administrative Manual (FAM) sections and clauses and specify the kinds of expectations that
the department faculty deems most appropriate for the disciplines of accounting and finance.
Expectations in the area of teaching
The Department of Accounting and Finance recognizes that teaching is the key mission in
CSUSB. The department encourages its faculty to explore the effectiveness of various teaching
modes and methods and adopt those that best suit the courses they teach.
1. 1. Expectations for tenure and promotion to associate professor
The faculty member being evaluated for tenure and promotion to associate professor will be
evaluated in the following areas.
a. Course design: Course objectives are set up in accordance with the requirement of the
relevant academic program and, if applicable, department course guidelines; the mode and
method of instruction are appropriate to the course being taught; different aspects of the course
are coherently organized and different parts of the course content are logically sequenced.
b. Content delivery: Information is conveyed to students clearly; teaching methods and
classroom activities are suited to course objectives and student population; assignments and
assessment instruments reflect course content and are appropriate in terms of level of difficulty.
c. Academic standards: Appropriate level of rigor is maintained in all aspects of the course, but
particularly in course content and assessment. d. Instructional Effectiveness: Effectiveness in
helping students learn is evidenced by SOTEs, visitation reports, and other information in the
file. If applicable, concerns raised by students in SOTEs and/or colleagues in visitation reports
are addressed and the issues of concern are resolved or improved upon over time.
1.2. Expectations for promotion to full professor

162

The faculty member being evaluated for promotion to professor should demonstrate sustained
performance in all four areas of teaching as seen in 1.1.a‐d, above.
II. Expectations in the area of research, scholarly, and creative contributions
The Accounting and Finance Department also recognizes that its faculty is entrusted with the
mission to contribute to knowledge making. In accordance with the FAM, which encourages
both “qualitative and quantitative standards” to be used for the assessment of faculty members’
contributions, the department agrees to the following expectations for its faculty.
2.1. Expectations for tenure and promotion to associate professor
According to FAM 300, faculty members at the rank of associate professor must demonstrate
successful accomplishment in research. For faculty members in Accounting and Finance who
are being reviewed for tenure and promotion to associate professor, successful accomplishment
in research may be demonstrated by meeting the expectations set forth below. a. Typically, two
to four (2‐4) publications in blind peer reviewed, Cabell‐listed academic/professional journals
evaluated according to the following criteria:
1) Quality: The quality of a publication may be evidenced by the journal’s circulation,
acceptance rate, or it ranking by recognized agencies; the citation frequency, reviews of, or
comments on the publication, or any other pertinent information such as its use or citation in the
public arena.
2) Significance: Defined as the contribution to knowledge, significance is assessed through, for
example, the originality of the topic of the publication, the soundness and innovation of its
methodology, and the validity and significance of its findings.
3) Authorship: The department encourages joint research and recognizes that joint‐authorship is
common in the disciplines it houses. However, it also recognizes that a single‐authorship may
indicate a greater amount of contribution by the author to the publication than a joint-authorship.
Hence extra weight may be given to a single‐authored publication.
For disciplines whose journals are not normally listed in Cabell’s and/or are not usually double
blind peer reviewed but in which journal publication is the usual outlet of scholarship, a
publication in such journals may be assessed on the same criteria herein stipulated.
b. Evidence of any of the following, though not required, may also demonstrate the significance
of the contributions the faculty member has made to advancing the knowledge in his or her
disciplines.
1) Keynote speeches at conferences.
2) Invited talks at different venues such as universities, businesses, or a public event
related to the faculty member’s profession/discipline.
3) Conference presentations.

163

4) Appearances in public media about a topic in the faculty member’s
profession/discipline.
5) Editing of monographs and publication of textbooks.
6) Receipt of grants, contract, award, prize, or other indication of professional growth.
7) Leadership and/or service in recognized professional societies.
8) Service on editorial boards of journals.
9) Any other pertinent contributions to knowledge making.
2. 2. Expectations for promotion to full professor
FAM 300 calls for both accomplishment and recognition of faculty members at the rank of full
professor. The faculty member applying for promotion to full professor is expected to
accomplish the following since the last promotion.
a. Typically, two to four [2‐4] publications in blind peer reviewed, Cabell‐listed
academic/professional journals evaluated according to the following criteria:
1) Quality: The quality of a publication may be evidenced by the journal’s circulation,
acceptance rate, or it ranking by recognized agencies; the citation frequency, reviews of, or
comments on the publication, or any other pertinent information such as its use or citation in the
public arena. The quality of these publications is expected to be higher than the quality of those
for the purpose of tenure and promotion to associate professor as seen in 2.1.a.1.
2) Significance: Defined as the contribution to knowledge, significance is assessed through, for
example, the originality of the topic of the publication, the soundness and innovation of its
methodology, and the validity and significance of its findings. The publications for promotion to
full professor are expected to more significant to knowledge making in the faculty member’s
discipline or profession than those for the purpose of tenure and promotion to associate
professor as seen in 2.1.a.2.
3) Authorship: The department encourages joint research and recognizes that joint‐authorship is
common in the disciplines it houses. However, it also recognizes that a single‐authorship may
indicate a greater amount of contribution by the author to the publication than a joint-authorship.
Hence extra weight may be given to a single‐authored publication. For disciplines whose
journals are not normally listed in Cabell’s and/or are not usually double blind peer reviewed but
in which journal publication is the usual outlet of scholarship, a publication in such journals may
be assessed on the same criteria herein stipulated.
b. Evidence of any of the following, though not required, may also demonstrate the significance
of the contributions the faculty member has made to advancing the knowledge in his or her
disciplines.
1) Keynote speeches at conferences.
2) Invited talks at different venues such as universities, businesses, or a public event related to
the faculty member’s profession/discipline.
3) Conference presentations.
4) Appearances in public media about a topic in the faculty member’s profession/discipline.

164

5) Editing of monographs and publication of textbooks.
6) Receipt of grants, contract, award, prize, or other indication of professional growth.
7) Leadership and/or service in recognized professional societies.
8) Service on editorial boards of journals.
9) Any other pertinent contributions to knowledge making.
III. Expectations in the area of service Service is broadly defined as service in university
governance, student advising, and community and professional service. Underlying all these
broad areas is the notion of citizenship: The expectation that the faculty member is an effective
contributor in the various areas of service and a collegial professional in the day‐to‐day
functioning of the department and the university.
3.1.Expectations for tenure and promotion to associate professor
A faculty member reviewed for tenure and promotion to associate professor will be evaluated in
light of the following expectations.
a. University governance: Actively participation in and notable contributions to university
governance at the department and college level. Some participation at the university
level.
b. Student advising: The faculty member has supported student learning through
advising and other services.
c. Community and professional service: Some participation in service activities in the
community and/or in the faculty member’s profession.
3.2.Expectations for promotion to full professor A faculty member reviewed for promotion to full
professor is evaluated in light of the following.
a. University governance: Significant contributions to and a leadership role in university
governance at the department and college level. Active participation at the university level.
b. Student advising: Continued support for student learning through advising and other services.
c. Community and professional service: Notable contributions to the community or to his or her
profession. Implementation The department chair will make sure that this document is a.
Provided to the newly hired tenure‐track faculty member and to the department evaluation
committee.
b. Distributed to the College of Business and Public Administration and its evaluation committee
and relevant units in the university. Together with the department evaluation committee, the
department chair will implement these guidelines by applying the standards and expectations in
the RPT process. The chair and the department evaluation committee are encouraged to make
explicit reference to the expectations in this document to achieve clarity and consistency both
longitudinally (in the evaluation of a faculty member over time) and latitudinally (in the
evaluations of different faculty members in the same cycle)

165

FAM 651.536
DEPARTMENT OF ANTHROPOLOGY GUIDELINES FOR THE
EVALUATION OF PROBATIONARY AND TENURE TRACK FACULTY
I. OVERVIEW
The purpose of these departmental guidelines is to guide faculty in meeting and exceeding
university expectations by clarifying their meaning in the specific disciplinary and departmental
context of Anthropology at CSUSB.
II. GUIDELINES
A. Teaching
The Department of Anthropology follows the criteria for performance review of teaching set forth
in the University document (“Procedures and Criteria ….”). As with the University, the
Department will not recommend anyone for promotion or tenure who does not at least “meet
expectations” in the area of teaching.
To be deemed as “above expectations” in terms of teaching, the faculty member must not only
meet the criteria set out in the University document but also i) require substantive written work in
upper-division and/or graduate courses except in cases where the faculty member can
demonstrate that other forms of student evaluation are more appropriate for a particular course;
ii) routinely earn higher SOTE scores than the means for the College of Social and Behavioral
Sciences for similar types of courses (e.g. labs, large lectures) at the appropriate class levels.
B. Research, Scholarly or Creative Contributions
The Department of Anthropology expects faculty to develop and maintain a continuing program
of research and scholarship that demonstrates intellectual and professional growth and
recognition in the broader anthropological community appropriate to their area of
anthropological specialization.
In preparing the Faculty Activities Report a faculty member in Anthropology is encouraged to
situate her or his research within the discipline in terms of peer review, juried, refereed
processes, publication venues, funding (as applicable), importance of her or his work to the
field, and levels of productivity relative to expectations within her or his area of specialization.
The faculty member is encouraged to contextualize his or her role in the research in terms of
how it is situated within the discipline’s frameworks, methods, and publication practices in terms
of expectations of numbers of peer reviewed products, authorship, publication venue and other
relevant factors. The Department of Anthropology recognizes that the diversity of research,
scholarly, and creative activities produced by anthropologists varies depending on many factors,
including the faculty member’s area of expertise, disciplinary and sub-disciplinary frameworks,

166

methods, and publication practices. Given this diversity, the Department also does not quantify
expectations for “meeting” and “exceeding expectations”. However, unless the faculty member
convincingly situates his or her research (see previous paragraph) outside widely if tacitly
accepted disciplinary norms, the department loosely ranks common scholarly activities as
follows in evaluating a faculty member for tenure and promotion:
1. Peer-reviewed academic publications: In all cases faculty members should provide
proof of the peer-reviewing, e.g. in the form of copies of referees reports or information
from a journal’s website about its reviewing process. The best peer-reviewed products
are papers in professionally recognized peer-reviewed journals and books published by
recognized academic presses. Peer-reviewed chapters in edited books published by
academic presses are also highly regarded by the Department, as is the editing of such
books provided the faculty member also has a substantive contribution to the volume.
2. A successful externally funded peer-reviewed fiscal award in support of research and
scholarship for which the faculty member is the PI or co-PI.
3. A college-level textbook whose content has been peer-reviewed prior to publication.
4. A successfully juried multimedia or film product equivalent to a publication in which
the faculty member took a leading role. (This does NOT mean conference
presentations.)
5. Non-peer reviewed chapters and articles in edited volumes and academic journals, as
well as invited contributions to academic encyclopedias and similar publications. These
will be evaluated based on the prestige of the publication as evident from such factors as
the publication venue, and the status and reputations of other contributors to the same
works.
6. Substantive professional involvement in activities such as refereeing scholarly
proposals for external funding agencies at the request of such agencies, refereeing
manuscript submissions to peer-review journals and academic publishers, and (co)editing peer-review journals.
7. Scholarly presentations at conferences, workshops, and symposia. Such
presentations will be evaluated on several criteria, such as whether a written paper or
well-prepared PowerPoint presentation is included in the FAR, and the importance and
prestige of the venue.
8. Book reviews in academic journals.
In all cases evaluators will attempt to evaluate the quality, as well as the quantity, of publications
and activities. To assist with this, faculty are strongly encouraged to include in their FAR such
things as published reviews of their books, and evidence that their work has been cited and
discussed and has therefore made an impact upon the discipline.
The Department recognizes that a productive and well-rounded scholar within our discipline will
engage in many of the activities listed above. Thus, the Department’s ranking of the activities of
a scholar in anthropology is an attempt to ensure that a faculty member does not concentrate
too much effort in activities such as conference presentations, which on their own will not
normally lead to tenure or promotion. Moreover, for tenure and promotion evidence of peerreviewed publications is essential. Given the varied natures of the sub-disciplines of

167

anthropology and the products of scholarship, the Department does not quantify the number of
peer-reviewed publications required for promotion and tenure. However, the Department
recognizes that this lack of quantified expectations may be a source of concern to a
probationary faculty member. Therefore, probationary faculty are strongly encouraged to create
a written Professional Development Plan at the beginning of each academic year and discuss it
with a tenured mentor in the Department and the Department Chair. This will help the
Department to guide the probationary faculty member towards tenure. According to the
University criteria, a faculty member to be considered as having achieved “above expectations”
in the area of research and scholarship must “have attained recognition beyond the University in
research, scholarly activity and/or creative activity.” A faculty member who believes that her or
his professional activities are “above expectations” is encouraged to request an external review
of professional activities materials, as explained in the “Procedures and Criteria…”. C.
University and/or Community Service The Department of Anthropology follows the criteria for
performance review of Service set forth in the University document (“Procedures and Criteria
….”) both in terms of what is deemed as “meeting expectations” and “above expectations”.
However, with reference to service activities in the community outside the University, the
Department expects that such service should clearly draw upon the faculty member’s
professional expertise.

FAM 651.537 DEPARTMENT OF CHEMISTRY AND BIOCHEMISTRY RETENTION,
PROMOTION, AND TENURE (RPT) TENURE-TRACK FACULTY EVALUATION
GUIDELINES
I. Preamble
The purpose of these departmental guidelines is to assist faculty in meeting and exceeding
expectations in the promotion and tenure process by summarizing the criteria published in the
Faculty Administrative Manual (FAM 300) and clarifying their meaning where appropriate in the
specific disciplinary and departmental context of Chemistry and Biochemistry at CSUSB.
Throughout these guidelines, criteria for retention before tenure in the RPT process is significant
involvement and progress towards the goals set forth for promotion to the next rank.
II. Expectations in the Area of Teaching
The Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry follows the criteria for performance review of
teaching set forth in the University FAM 300 document (“Procedures and Criteria . . . “: Chapter
2, Section II.A.). As with the University (Chapter 2, Section IV.B.), the Department will not
recommend anyone for tenure or promotion to associate professor who does not at least “meet
expectations” in the four areas of teaching: 1) command of subject matter, 2) course
design/preparation, instructional material, and organization, 3) effectiveness in instruction, and
4) academic assessment of students.

168

To be rated as “above expectations” in the area of teaching for the purposes of tenure and
promotion to associate professor, the faculty member must also meet the criteria set forth in the
University document in that the above four areas are met and in addition at least one of the
following is met: 1) a preponderance of evidence demonstrating excellence in teaching as
indicated in classroom visitation reports, Student Opinions of Teaching Effectiveness (SOTEs or
alternative student evaluation instruments), the Faculty Activities Report (FAR), or additional
appropriate documentation related to teaching; 2) demonstrate a record of involvement and
achievement indicative of a commitment to continued professional performance in teaching; or
3) a record of distinction for some aspect of teaching at or beyond the University.
To “meet expectations” for promotion to full professor, the department follows the criteria set
forth in FAM 300 for the university. The faculty member must demonstrate sustained proficiency
in the four areas and also demonstrate a record of involvement and achievement indicative of a
commitment to continued professional performance in teaching.
To be rated as “above expectations” for promotion to full professor, the faculty member in
addition to the criteria for “meets expectations”, must meet at least one of the following: 1) a
preponderance of evidence demonstrating excellence in teaching as indicated in classroom
visitation reports, SOTEs (or alternative student evaluation instruments), the Faculty Activities
Report, or additional appropriate documentation related to teaching; 2) demonstrate a record of
involvement and achievement indicative of a commitment to continued professional
performance in teaching; 3) a record of distinction for some aspect of teaching at or beyond the
University.
The following are examples that demonstrate expectations in the four areas of teaching.
Throughout the language that follows, the term “majority” is meant to be loosely applied in that
statistics and counting will not be performed. It should be obvious to the reviewer whether a
majority exists or not. This might require closer and more thorough inspection by the reviewer to
be sure; therefore it may be that “majority” is actually at least 60-75% and “large majority” is
more like 75-90%.
The department weighs SOTEs from lecture sections more highly than laboratory sections,
which in turn are more highly weighted than discussion or recitation sections (e.g. Chem 215)
due to the amount of time, effort, and course structure that is provided by the faculty member.
1) “Command of subject matter.” The majority of student comments pertaining to this should be
positive. The majority of the remarks in classroom visitation reports regarding this should also
be positive. The faculty member must have attained a terminal degree in the field.
2) “Course design/preparation, instructional material, and organization.” The majority of student
comments pertaining to this should be positive. The majority of the remarks in classroom
visitation reports regarding this should also be positive. The department evaluation committee
will also look at syllabi, course material, and expected student learning outcomes to determine if
the subject is covered adequately. This can typically be evaluated with respect to established

169

textbooks in the subject area and comparison to materials prepared in recent years for similar
classes at other universities.
3) “Effectiveness in instruction.” The majority of student comments pertaining to this should be
positive. The majority of the remarks in classroom visitation reports regarding this should also
be positive. This is also demonstrated by a majority of students progressing through the class
and being appropriately prepared for subsequent courses requiring prerequisite knowledge from
the course under consideration. Although not in the FAR, this could be observed by inspection
of course grades. This in general is not done by the review committee (because grades are not
part of the FAR) unless it is apparent that a problem may exist. In other words, if it is known
through regular advising that students are failing the class at a very high rate, or are passing
with good grades but are poorly prepared and therefore suffering bad grades in a subsequent
course, an inspection of grades could ensue and trigger a more thorough review of the
academic assessment of the students (below). Faculty members can document effectiveness in
instruction by providing in their FAR data on course pass rates, grade distributions, performance
on standardized exams (at the end of the course or subsequently on comprehensive
examinations, for example), success rates in subsequent courses, or graduation rates for
students who have completed their courses. These data are not required, but may be used to
support a faculty member's claim of effectiveness in instruction.
4) “Academic assessment of students”. The majority of student comments pertaining to this
should be positive. The majority of the remarks in classroom visitation reports regarding this
should also be positive. The department evaluation committee will also look at the midterms,
final exams, quizzes, homework assignments, laboratory assignments, and grading scales to
determine if the course material is being assessed properly and if the organization of the course
is conducive to the student in meeting the learning objectives of the course. Faculty will review
these documents to ensure an appropriate range of assessment activities for the course mode
and level, and that the assessment items themselves are in line with the rigor expected of
students in the department, as well as the student learning outcomes for the course. The mean
SOTE score for questions regarding overall quality of the course and contributions made by the
instructor towards learning have normally in the past been greater than 4 (on a 6-point scale) to
“meet expectations”
The following are examples of additional documentation required to demonstrate “above
expectations” in teaching.
1) “A preponderance of evidence demonstrating excellence should be present in the classroom
visitation reports, the SOTEs, and the Faculty Activities Report (FAR).” The visitors should
clearly be remarking in all areas that the faculty member is doing an excellent job. A large
majority of the SOTE comments should be highly positive with no more than a small minority of
negative comments. The mean scores for questions regarding overall quality and contributions
made towards learning have normally in the past been greater than 5. A representative
sampling of all the courses taught by the faculty member should be SOTE’d. Excellence should
be demonstrable in both lower and upper-division courses, service- and major courses as
applicable. The FAR should thoroughly document the excellence of course materials.
2) “Demonstrate a record of involvement and achievement indicative of a commitment to
continued professional performance in teaching.” This may include documented attendance at

170

Teaching Resource Center seminars and educational conferences. The faculty member should
be trying to implement new methods learned or continually trying to improve student learning,
and provide appropriate evaluation or assessment of the learning. The FAR should thoroughly
document any innovation or revision of courses performed by the faculty member. A record
implies sustained effort and performance.
3) “A record of distinction for some aspect of teaching at or beyond the University.” This may
include any on- or off-campus teaching awards, published teaching modules, techniques,
experiments, or textbooks. A record implies multiple examples. In addition the department highly
regards the following as supplemental in the demonstration of “meeting expectations” or “above
expectations” in Teaching:
4) A record of teaching, mentoring, and encouraging students in supervised undergraduate
research projects for credit, or through grants or contracts. A record implies multiple examples.
5) Supervision and mentoring as chair of graduate M.S. projects. Service as an additional
member of an M.S. student committee is also acknowledged, although not as highly as the
committee chair.
III. Expectations in the Area of Research, Scholarship, or Creative Activity The Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry follows the general criteria for performance review of research,
scholarship, or creative activity set forth in the University FAM 300 document (“Procedures and
Criteria . . .”: Chapter 2, Section II.B.).
As explained in FAM 300, Chapter 2, Section IV.C., at the rank of assistant professor during
years two and three of the probationary period, the faculty member is expected to demonstrate
involvement in research, scholarship, or creative activity. In subsequent years and for the
purposes of tenure, continued active involvement in and successful completion of some
professionally evaluated activities is expected. To “meet expectations” for the purposes of
tenure and promotion to associate professor, the faculty member must demonstrate a record of
active involvement in and successful accomplishment of research, scholarship, or creative
activities. Successful accomplishment requires completed activities that are professionally
evaluated. To “meet expectations” for the purposes of promotion to full professor, the faculty
member must continue to demonstrate a record of successful accomplishment and recognition
in research, scholarship, or creative activity. Recognition beyond the University is required for
“above expectations” for the purposes of promotion to both associate and full professor.
The department recognizes the following accomplishments in research, scholarship, or creative
activity. Active involvement constitutes productive work towards these goals. The department
does not quantify the number of examples that “meets expectations” or is “above expectations”,
but loosely ranks below the types of accomplishments in terms of weight. Within each of these
categories, quality varies. Journal and symposia stature, the size and competitiveness of grants,
etc., document higher quality in general, but the department does not quantify specific
benchmarks for the number of publications, the amount of the awards, journal impact factors,
etc., in order to evaluate the faculty member as “meet expectations” or “above expectations”.
External peer review and acceptance constitutes recognition beyond the University. To “meet
expectations”, at least one of the accomplishments must demonstrate acceptance by external

171

peer review in addition to other examples; to be “above expectations”, at least two
accomplishments must demonstrate acceptance by external peer review in addition to other
examples. Awards and special off-campus recognitions further document “above expectations.”
“Meets expectations” might constitute a smaller combination of items, and “above expectations”
should constitute a greater quantity. A smaller combination of higher quality or weighted
examples might be roughly equivalent to a larger number of lower quality or weighted examples.
In general we are looking for a faculty member’s abilities in obtaining funding for scholarly
activities or research projects, completion of the objectives and goals of the proposed project
involving CSUSB students, and successful presentation of the results of the activity to a larger
audience. In addition to discipline-specific research, the department considers scholarly activity
to include educational research, and pursuit of external funding for instrumentation, student
scholarships, or other resources. Publications, presentations, awards, etc. should address some
aspect of chemistry or biochemistry in the broadest sense.
1. Peer-reviewed publication in journals or books published by recognized academic presses.
The faculty member should be the first or senior author. Journal titles are field or sub-discipline
specific, but should be of commonly respected quality.
2. A successful externally funded peer-reviewed fiscal award in support of research and
scholarship for which the faculty member is the principal investigator (PI). In these examples,
scholarly blind review is normally provided by at least two independent people that are
established experts in the field in which the research is proposed, which is subsequently
returned to the PI for consideration. These awards tend to be nationally competitive, e.g. NSF,
NIH, DOE, ACS-PRF, etc.
3. A successfully funded external fiscal award in support of research, scholarship, or
professional activity for which the faculty member is the PI. In these examples, grant proposals
are reviewed and awarded, but not necessarily by scholarly experts in the field proposed. These
reviews may or may not be returned to the PI, and contain notably less scientific detail. These
awards may be more regionally targeted with proposals being reviewed by advisory boards, for
example, instead of being sent out to established leaders in the field.
4. Publication, book chapter, report, white paper, invited contributions, etc., by the faculty
member that is not peer-reviewed.
5. Peer-reviewed publication in journals, book chapter, etc., in which the faculty member is a coauthor contributing significant intellectual value.
6. A successful externally funded fiscal award in support of research and scholarship for which
the faculty member is a co-PI.
7. Scholarly presentations at conferences, workshops, and symposia. Platform presentations
are generally regarded more highly than poster presentations. National and international
conferences with a wider audience influential to the field of study are generally regarded more
highly than local or regional ones.

172

8. Refereeing of scholarly proposals for external funding agencies or manuscript submissions at
the request of the agencies or publishing editors. This may also be regarded as professional
service in the Service category.
9. External consultant ships. Examples include being retained as an expert scientific witness or
writing an opinion or deposition in a legal case; as an advisor in a company research and
development project; and technical assistance on a project, method, or instrumentation. This
may also be regarded as professional service in the Service category.
10. Successful internally-funded fiscal awards in support of research and scholarship.
11. Book, software, or product reviews. This may also be regarded as professional service in
the Service category.
12. Scholarly off-campus presentations by the faculty member’s students on research or
scholarly activity performed under the guidance and/or in the faculty member’s research
laboratory.
13. Scholarly presentations on campus by the faculty member or his/her students.
14. Other evidence of productive research or scholarly activity. This includes submitted
manuscripts that were not published or proposals that were not funded, attending professional
or research-orientated training workshops or conferences, conducting research at other
laboratories, work in progress, etc. Attendance at educational training or teaching workshops
and conferences should be documented in the area of Teaching. 15. Completed M.S. theses or
projects for which the faculty member served as committee chair. This may also be regarded as
documentation of effectiveness in the Teaching area. Service as a secondary committee
member or “reader” should be documented under Teaching, unless evidence can be produced
indicating a significant amount of creative, scholarly contributions to the project was made. 16.
Number and duration of research/project undergraduate students who receive academic credit,
and/or payment. Evidence of student success in graduating, and attaining placement in
productive employment in science, and/or acceptance and Last Revision 2015: FAC FSD: 14-02
FAM 651.537 Previous FAM N/A 8 persistence in graduate or professional programs. This may
also be regarded as documentation of effectiveness in the area of Teaching. IV. Expectations in
the Area of Service The Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry follows the criteria for
performance review of Service set forth in the University FAM 300 document (“Procedures and
Criteria . . .”: Chapter 2, Section II.C. and IV.D.) both in terms of what is evaluated as “meets
expectations” and “above expectations” in department, college, university, or community
service. For the purposes of tenure and promotion to associate professor, the expectations are
a demonstration of significant participation in the area of service in at least two of the areas
listed below. The department doesn’t quantify “significant” and a combination of quantity and
quality is considered. For the purposes of promotion to full professor, the faculty member is
expected to participate significantly in at least three of the areas listed below, and provide
effective leadership in some of these activities. To be evaluated as “above expectations”,
exceptional service must be clearly documented as to quantity and quality, with the
demonstration of unusual effectiveness or performance as a contributor or leader in the
University, off-campus community, or a combination of both. Examples of documented service
follow, arranged by scope. There are too many examples of possible service activities to list in
each category. Any official university committee or other service is acknowledged. Community
and professional service should be related or focused on chemistry or biochemistry and/or

173

science education in the broadest sense. Mere documentation of presence or attendance on
committees does not imply high quality. Documentation of work performed and
accomplishments in the service is required. The more work required on a committee
assignment, the more highly regarded that service is. Chairing committees is highly regarded.
Reassigned time or lack thereof may be considered when evaluating the quantity of work
performed. University, college, and department service is weighted somewhat more than
community or professional service (although professional services may also count as research
and scholarly activity). Weight is better determined here by the magnitude and quality of any
accomplishment and service rendered in a given area of scope.
1. Department committees such as the department evaluation committee and curriculum and
assessment committee. Other highly regarded department service activities include advising the
student chemistry club; providing, arranging, or supervising the technical support, maintenance
and repair of instruments; supervision and coordination of the student computer laboratory;
supervision and coordination of multiple teaching laboratory sections; effective advising of
individual students in their planned program, career objectives, and performance in their
courses; writing and completion of departmental reports such as for program review,
certification, and assessment; and maintaining the department web site.
2. College committees such as the evaluation or curriculum committees. Any official college
committee is regarded as important.
3. There are numerous university committees in which one can participate in, such as the
professional development, evaluation, and curriculum committees, and the WRI Faculty Council.
In general the department doesn’t judge one committee assignment as more important than
another for a given equity of contributed work. Non-committee services include departmental
representation to the California Faculty Association (CFA) or as an officer to the CFA, and
advisor of student clubs on campus. Membership in the Faculty Senate and any of its
committees is highly regarded as an important university service.
4. There are many ways in which one can participate in community service, including but not
limited to judging science fairs or volunteering for Olympiads, visiting local schools to give
presentations, serving on advisory boards pertaining to science education or applied chemistry,
mentoring or tutoring students outside CSUSB, etc. Service in local, state, national or
international government is highly regarded.
5. Professional service such as reviewing manuscripts or grant proposals, software, or book
chapters, etc., can be considered as scholarly activity as well as community and university
service. Serving on editorial boards or in offices of professional societies are further examples.
External consultantships or serving as a scientific advisor for a private company or public
agency, and performing chemistry-related services such as obtaining or analyzing data for
another entity or agency, are acknowledged. Compensation or lack thereof may be considered
when evaluating the quantity of work in the professional service category. Media commentary as
an expert is considered, although not as highly.

174

These guidelines were approved by the chemistry tenured and tenure-track faculty on January
27, 2015.

FAM 651.4 POLICY CONCERNING PERIODIC REVIEW OF
DEPARTMENT CHAIRS/SCHOOL DIRECTORS
https://www.csusb.edu/sites/default/files/upload/file/FSD87-27.R5_ChairReview_0.pdf

1.Purpose
The purpose of this FAM is to develop a policy for the review of department chairs/school
directors. Chairs/directors are appointed to three year terms. Periodic reviews of department
chairs/school directors are designed to evaluate their performance and accomplishments and to
provide constructive feedback to a department chair/school director who is seeking
reappointment.
2. Scheduling
2.1 Periodic Reviews: The College dean is responsible for scheduling the periodic
reviews of the department chair/school directors. Such reviews normally occur in the third year,
but the College dean may conduct an earlier review at his/her discretion.
2.2 The chair/director shall notify the College dean, in writing, by October 15 of the third
year of service if she/he wishes to be considered for a further three year term.
2.3 Reviews shall be completed by April 1.
3. Review Committee
3.1 At the discretion of the College dean, the review committee for a department
chair/program director shall consist of five to seven members, with the proviso that a majority of
the committee shall be faculty.
3.2 The department shall elect two members to serve on the review committee from
among the tenured and tenure track faculty. The dean shall solicit nominations from all
departmental faculty. The names of all nominees who have agreed to serve, (including selfnominations), will be forwarded to the College Elections Officer by the dean. The College
Elections Officer will then distribute ballots and oversee the election.
3.3 At the discretion of the College dean, s/he shall appoint one to three additional
tenured faculty external to the department to serve on the review committee. An external faculty
member will serve as the chair of the review committee
3.4 One student, undergraduate or graduate, who is majoring within the department or
school, will be appointed to serve on the committee. This student member will be selected from
a list of at least two students recommended by faculty in the department/school to the College
dean. The final selection of a student representative shall be made by appropriate College
dean.

175

3.5 One non-academic staff member who has permanent status within the College
containing the department or school will serve on the committee. The staff member will be
selected by the appropriate College dean.
3.6 The College dean shall charge the committee at its first meeting.
3.7 The deliberations of the committee shall remain confidential.
4. Charge to the Department Chair/School Director Review Committee
4.1 The chair will prepare a self-study describing her/his areas of responsibility and
accomplishments in the period under review and identifying any issues that are expected to
arise during the next term. S/he shall be invited to furnish a list of people from within the
university and the general community, as appropriate, from whom comments could be solicited.
4.2The review committee shall consider the performance of the department chair in the
context of the activities of the position. These shall include but may not be necessarily limited to
the responsibilities of the position as stated in Responsibilities of Department Chairs/School
Directors policy.
4.3 As part of the review process, the review committee shall evaluate that individual's
overall effectiveness within the college and the University as a whole, and assess the strengths
and the weaknesses of the performance of the department chair/school director.
5. Areas of Evaluation To assist the review committee in its deliberations, the following items
are suggested for consideration. These items shall not be considered as definitive or limiting.
5.1 Leadership FSD: 87-27.R5 FAM 651.4 Previous FAM 246 Last Revision 2017: FAC
3
5.2 Fiscal Management
5.3 Instruction
5.4 Faculty Relationships
5.5 Student Relationships.
5.6 Staff Relationships
5.7 Administrative Items
5.8 Community Relations
5.9 Office Management
5.10 Any other items listed in the Chair Appointment Letter, not included in the areas
listed above.
6. Department/School Review Committee Procedures
6.1 The first meeting of the committee shall be called by the college dean to charge the
review committee.
6.2 The review committee shall:
6.2.1 Interview the department chair/school director and offer an
opportunity to discuss with the review committee any substantive issues affecting the
department and its effective operation
6.2.2 Request a list of people outside the department whom the chair
wishes to be included in the review. The committee may expand this list at its
discretion

176

6.2.3 Prepare and distribute a survey instrument to constituencies, as
appropriate. Such an instrument should include questions that relate to the
department chair’s primary areas of responsibilities. (See Attachment A for a
Sample Instrument).
6.2.4 Announce to constituents a schedule for personal interviews and
open forums and invite written statements from faculty staff and students.
6.2.5 Consider any previous periodic review’s recommendations for
improvement, if applicable
7. The Review Committee’s Report: Use and Distribution
After thorough consultation and deliberation, the review committee shall prepare a written
report which shall contain the following:
7.1.1 An executive summary of the report.
7.1.2 An analysis of the survey results.
7.1.3 An analysis of all other information obtained from open forums, interviews,
and written statements.
7.1.4 An assessment of strengths and weaknesses and an overall evaluation of
the department chair’s/school director’s effectiveness with respect to the college and the
University as a whole.
7.1.5 An assessment of how well the department chair/school director followed
previous recommendations for improvements.
7.1.6 A recommendation for reappointment or non-reappointment for a three year
term. If the recommendation is for reappointment, the review committee shall include
specific recommendations for improvements.
7.2 The review committee shall then submit its report to the college dean, with a copy to
the department chair. This completes the review committee’s work
8. Action by the College Dean
8.1 The College dean shall, within a reasonable period of time, meet with the
department chair/school director to discuss the review committee’s findings and
recommendations.
8.2 The College dean shall provide a copy of the executive summary of the review
committee’s report to the members of the department/school, following that meeting.
8.3 The dean shall prepare and transmit to the chair/director her/his written
recommendation for re-appointment or non-reappointment to the position.
8.4, The Chair/Director shall have 10 calendar days in which to respond. Any response
will be included with the materials to be sent to the Provost/Vice President for Academic Affairs.
8.5 The dean shall then submit all materials to the Provost/Vice President for Academic Affairs.
These shall include the review committee’s report, the dean’s recommendation and any
response from the department chair/school director.
9. Action by the Vice President for Academic Affairs/Provost

177

9.1 Upon receipt of the materials from the dean, the Vice President for Academic
Affairs/Provost shall review the performance of the department chair/school director and shall
make the decision to reappoint or not to reappoint him/her to a further three-year term.
9.2 Notification of this decision shall be in writing to the department chair/school director,
the dean, and the faculty and staff of the department/school.
9.3 If the decision is for non-reappointment, the Vice President for Academic
Affairs/Provost shall notify the college dean to put into operation the Policy for Recruitment and
Appointment of a Department Chair/School Director.
10. General Provisions of the Review
10.1 The department chair/school director review committee report, along with any
response, shall become a part of the department chair's/school director’s PAF.
10.2 A department chair/school director may not participate in his/her own review except
to submit the response and meet with the review committee . At the conclusion of the review
committee's work, all remaining items used in the review process shall be destroyed.
FSD 87-27.R5 Approved by the Faculty Senate Karen Kolehmainen, Chair Date: 6/6/17
Reviewed by the Academic Affairs Council Shari McMahan, Provost and Date: 8/27/17 Vice
President for Academic Affairs Approved by the President Tomás Morales Date: 9/13/17

FAM 651.538
(RPT: Department/School Guidelines): Department
of Communication Studies
Retention, Promotion, & Tenure (RPT) Evaluation Guidelines
Department of Communication Studies
California State University, San Bernardino
v. 161104
Introduction
This document was written to complement the CSUSB Faculty Administrative Manual
Procedures and Criteria for Performance Review and Periodic Evaluation, Volume 1:
Instructional Faculty, FAM 652.4 (Revised 2013; appended to this document). For the most part,
the document that follows specifies criteria that are to be applied at the point of application for
tenure or tenure and promotion, although some criteria for the second and fourth year
performance reviews are given for Research, Scholarly, or Creative Contributions. Per the FAM:
to be given tenure, the faculty member must achieve a minimum rating of “Meets Expectations”
in all three evaluation areas. To be promoted to associate professor, the faculty member must
achieve a rating of Above Expectations in one area and ratings of at least Meets Expectations in

178

the other two areas (see FAM 652.4, Chapter 2: Criteria for Performance Review, Section III:
Evaluation Rating System and Section IV: Application of Criteria and Rating System.)
These guidelines assume a teaching load of three courses per term. Particularly in considering
the applicant’s record in the area of Research, Scholarly, or Creative Contributions, evaluators
should take into account any increase in teaching load during the period under review, for
example if the nominal workload requirement increases to four courses per term after
conversion
to a semester system.
The faculty member may cross-list activities in the three FAR sections (Teaching; Service;
Research, Scholarly and Creative Contributions). If an activity is cross-listed, then the faculty
member should include a parenthetical note after the activity, such as "(also listed under
Service:
S-8),” and submit only one set of supporting document(s) placed under the primary category for
that activity.
A. TEACHING
I. Preamble
The Department of Communication Studies believes that faculty should maintain a scholarly
level of instruction, show commitment to high academic and pedagogic standards, be effective
in
instructing and advising students, guide and motivate students, and apply evaluative standards
fairly and appropriately with respect to all students. Faculty are expected to demonstrate
proficiency in the four aspects of teaching as specified in FAM 652.4, including 1. command of
subject matter, 2. course design/preparation, instructional material, and organization, 3.
effectiveness in instruction, and 4. academic assessment of students.
II. Factors to Consider
2
Evaluators should consider factors that may influence official student evaluation scores
including
class size, subject matter, teaching medium (e.g. online), whether the course is required, and
number of new class preparations of the faculty member under review. For example, general
education (GE) classes, departmental undergraduate and graduate core courses, most of which
focus on theory and research methods, large lecture classes (40 and above), and courses
dealing
with sensitive topics may receive lower student evaluation scores. Evaluators should be aware
that all tenured and tenure-track faculty in the Department contribute considerable time as
academic advisors to students pursuing the B.A. in Communication Studies. Some faculty
members also serve on committees for students completing the culminating requirement
(comprehensive exam, thesis, or project) for the M.A. degree.
III. Faculty Member’s Teaching Narrative
The faculty member should include with the FAR a succinct narrative that contextualizes his/her
teaching for RPT reviewers. Most narratives will be under one page; however, if needed, the

179

narrative can run up to 500 words. In this narrative, faculty may describe such elements as the
relationships among his/her teaching goals, materials, approaches and assignments; and,
where
relevant, efforts made to improve his/her teaching, particularly if those efforts are in response to
feedback from students or peers.
IV. Criteria for Proficiency in Teaching
Above expectations
A rating of Above Expectations at the point of application for tenure or tenure and promotion
requires these achievements listed below.
1. Predominantly positive student evaluations as assessed by the official student evaluation
instrument. As a general guideline, median scores of “very good” to “excellent” on the
official student evaluation instrument along with predominantly positive student written
comments suggest Above Expectations performance in teaching.
2. Qualitative student comments are commensurate with the aforementioned student
evaluation scores and reflect evidence of the quality of instruction in all four areas
specified by FAM 654.2.
3. Classroom visitation reports that are consistently positive with regard to the four areas of
teaching proficiency described above.
4. Syllabus and other course materials should follow FAM 820.9.
5. Evidence that course expectations for student performance are appropriately current,
rigorous and challenging.
6. Evidence of student advisement activities. This could include advisement of individual
undergraduate and graduate students, and services to advisees (e.g., petitions, letters of
support).
7. Any of the following additional forms of evidence of teaching effectiveness valued by the
Department:
a. Evidence of new course development, instructional innovations, and contributions
to curricula or program change.
3
b. Attendance of instructionally-related training activities such as workshops,
seminars, and conferences.
8. Any of the following additional forms of evidence of teaching effectiveness valued by the
Department:
a. Instructionally-related grants
b. Teaching awards or other forms of professional recognition.
c. Development of textbooks, workbooks, anthologies, online resources, or other
teaching resources
9. Any of the following evidence of individual mentoring of undergraduate and graduate
students resulting in superior student work, including
a. the supervision of honors students,
b. the chairing of thesis/project committees,

180

c. directing independent study projects and internships,
d. participating as an advisor on thesis/project committees
e. the granting of awards to supervised students
f. the advancement of supervised students into graduate school
g. contributions toward improved advisement
h. advisement or supervision of student organizations
i. special Department assignments related to student advisement.
Meets Expectations
A rating of Meets Expectations at the point of application for tenure or tenure and promotion
requires these achievements:
1. Predominantly positive student evaluations as assessed by the official student evaluation
instrument. As a general guideline, median scores of “good” to “very good” on the official
student evaluation instrument along with predominantly positive student written comments
suggest Meets Expectations performance in teaching.
2. Qualitative student comments are commensurate with the aforementioned student evaluation
scores and reflect evidence of the quality of instruction in all four areas specified by FAM
654.2.
3. Classroom visitation reports that are consistently positive with regard to the four areas of
teaching proficiency described above.
4. Syllabus and other course materials should follow FAM 820.9.
5. Evidence that course expectations for student performance are appropriately current,
rigorous
and challenging.
6. Evidence of student advisement activities. This could include advisement of individual
undergraduate and graduate students, and services to advisees (e.g., petitions, letters of
support).
7. Any of the following additional forms of evidence of teaching effectiveness valued by the
Department:
a. Evidence of new course development, instructional innovations, and contributions to
curricula or program change.
b. Attendance of instructionally-related training activities such as workshops, seminars,
and conferences.
Below Expectations
1. Mixed (positive-negative) student evaluations as assessed by the official student
evaluation instrument. As a general guideline, median scores of “poor” to “good” on the
official student evaluation instrument along with mixed student written comments
suggest Below Expectations performance in teaching.
2. Qualitative student comments are commensurate with the aforementioned student
evaluation scores and reflect evidence of the quality of instruction in only few of four
areas specified by FAM 654.2.
3. Classroom visitation reports that are mixed with regard to the four areas of teaching
proficiency described above.
4. Limited evidence of significant effort to address student and visiting faculty comments to

181

improve teaching.
Well-below expectations
1. Predominantly negative student evaluations as assessed by the official student evaluation
instrument. As a general guideline, median scores of “poor” on the official student
evaluation instrument along with predominantly negative student written comments
suggest Well-below Expectations performance in teaching.
2. Qualitative student comments are commensurate with the aforementioned student
evaluation scores and reflect evidence of the lack of necessary quality of instruction in all
four areas specified by FAM 654.2.
3. Classroom visitation reports that are mostly negative with regard to the four areas of
teaching proficiency described above.
4. Lack of evidence of significant improvement in teaching and effort to address student and
visiting faculty comments to improve teaching.
B. RESEARCH, SCHOLARLY OR CREATIVE CONTRIBUTIONS
I. Preamble
The Department of Communication Studies strongly believes that scholarship complements and
enriches teaching while contributing to the advancement of the discipline. Faculty members are
expected to engage in an ongoing program of focused scholarship and/or creative work that
demonstrates professional growth in communication studies, and results in scholarly
achievements that contribute to the discipline and receive favorable review from their peers. To
the extent possible this work shall be integrated into their teaching activities.
II. Faculty Member’s Narrative for Research, Scholarly, or Creative Contributions
The faculty member should include with the FAR a succinct narrative that contextualizes his/her
professional work for RPT evaluators. Most narratives will be under one page; however, if
needed, the narrative can run up to 500 words. The narrative should describe the foci of the
5
professional activities, the faculty member’s interest in them, and the contributions that they
make to the faculty member’s discipline and possibly other communities. Faculty may also
discuss the value and significance of their work by including information on such elements as
the
following:
• Reviews or citations of the work
• The importance, quality, prestige, and/or selectivity (e.g., acceptance rates) of the
venues where the work appears
• Reader reports for accepted manuscripts or manuscripts under review
• Impact of the work on the discipline and/or other communities
• The value of the methodologies, approaches, or processes involved in the work
• Awards or other recognition for the work
• Invitations to present or publish the work
• Invitations to review a book or article manuscript
• The scope of dissemination of the work

182

• Other testimony from experts about the work
• Other information that indicates the importance of the work and/or the faculty
member’s reputation in the field
• Book contract and/or acceptance letters for journal articles or chapters in edited
volumes. Such documentation should be provided for work accepted for publication
but not yet published.
III. Evidence of Research, Scholarly or Creative Contributions
The following are representative of scholarly, research, and creative activity upon which
evaluation is based:
Category 1
Author of a peer-reviewed book
Author of a peer-reviewed journal article
Author of an invited journal article
Author of a peer-reviewed book chapter
Author of an original contribution to a scholarly handbook or yearbook
Author of a textbook
Editor of a book and/or journal special issue
Author of or contributor (PI or co-PI) to a research or creative project funded grant:
government or prestigious foundation
Director, writer, or creative producer of a peer-reviewed or juried documentary or other media
production
Category 2
Author of an original contribution to a prominent encyclopedia

Author of a competitively selected paper presented at a regional/national/international
conference
colloquia Author of an original contribution to a textbook
Author of or contributor to a funded grant: external, but not government or prestigious
foundation Author of a non-refereed journal article
Creator and distributor of educational and/or professional materials (e.g., audiotape, videotape,
computer software)

183

FAM 651.577
DEPARTMENT OF PSYCHOLOGY Guidelines for the Evaluation of
Probationary and Tenure Track Faculty
FAM 651.577 DEPARTMENT OF PSYCHOLOGY RPT .pdf
Each section below (teaching, research, scholarly, or creative contributions, and service)
delineates what is considered necessary to meet expectations when applying for tenure and/or
promotion and are aligned with the FAM. Information is also provided regarding activities that
are considered to be above expectations (in the event that all aspects of performance
considered to be a marker of meets expectations have been met). Faculty who are missing
elements of practice considered to be necessary for meeting expectations may be rated as
below expectations or well below expectations as indicated in the FAM.
According to the current FAM (652.1), “the President or designee may award tenure to a faculty
member after a six-year probationary period. Upon application by a candidate and consideration
of positive recommendations from evaluation committees, Department Chairs, and/or College
Dean, the President or designee may award tenure before the end of the six-year probationary
period.” The FAM also notes that “a probationary faculty member shall normally be considered
for promotion at the same time he/she is considered for tenure.” In addition to these guidelines,
revisions of the FAM indicate that four years of service (including service credit, if applicable) is
required to be eligible to apply for promotion to associate professor and there is no retroactive
application of the new criteria to faculty who came in under the old criteria. The FAM does not
specifically address an expected timeframe for promotion from Associate Professor to Full. The
expectation is that benchmarks, such as those outlined in the document below, will be met for
anyone wishing to apply for promotion to Full Professor. Faculty being evaluated with regard to
retention should either demonstrate success in attaining indicators necessary to be rated as
meeting expectations or demonstrate progress towards acquiring these benchmarks. In
addition, faculty being evaluated for retention will be judged in terms of progress towards what is
needed at the time of tenure and/or promotion.
According to the FAM, to be considered for tenure, faculty should score at least meets
expectations in all three areas (teaching, research, scholarly, or creative contributions, and
service). To be considered for promotion (either to associate professor or professor), faculty
should score at least meets expectations in two areas and above expectations in at least one
area. Faculty rated as below expectations or well below expectations in any of the three areas
will not be granted tenure and/or promotion.
I. Teaching
Faculty in the psychology department are expected to demonstrate proficiency in several areas
of teaching including command of subject matter, course preparation and organization,

184

instructional material, effectiveness of instruction, academic assessment, and student
advisement, supervision, and mentorship.
Proficiency shall be determined on the basis of student evaluations, course materials, peer
review of teaching, developed curriculum materials, evidence of student supervision/mentoring,
outcome measures of effectiveness, and/or other instructional contributions to the department.
In order to earn tenure and promotion to the rank of associate professor, the psychology faculty
member is expected to demonstrate the following accomplishments. Accomplishments vary with
regard to a rating of meets versus above expectations, as noted below. For promotion to full
professor, a continuation of these accomplishments across the post-tenure period is required.
Elements indicative of meets expectations (all must be met to be given a rating of meets
expectations):
1. Classroom visitation reports that are consistently positive with regard to the various
areas of classroom teaching described above.
2. Predominantly positive student evaluations, including the written comments, as
assessed by the SOTE instrument. As a general guideline for what constitutes
predominantly positive student
evaluations, faculty members typically receive median scores of at least 4.5 or higher on
the two SOTE items (or demonstrate progression to this standard over time), with an
absence of negative themes in student commentary across courses and time.
3. Course materials that are judged current and reflective of research-based and
departmental standards.
4. Course materials and course approach that demonstrate comprehensive and
objective coverage. Examples of objective coverage include the presentation of
research-based evidence, opportunity to discuss and debate controversial topics, and
use of
evidence-based sources of written material.
5. Evidence of individual mentoring of undergraduate and graduate students resulting in
tangible student accomplishments. Mentoring may include the supervision of honors
students, the chairing of thesis/project committees, directing independent study projects
and
internships, supervising student presentations, and participating as a reader on
thesis/project committees.
6. Evidence in the form of syllabi and course materials that expectations for student
performance are appropriately rigorous and challenging. This can include, but is not
limited to, evidence based reading materials appropriate to the course level,
assignments that encourage
critical thinking, and high impact practices.

185

7. Evidence of being generally available and accessible to students, as reflected, for
example, in student comments on the SOTEs and consistently providing the requisite
number of hours for office hours.
8. Evidence of student advisement activities. This could include advisement of individual
undergraduate and graduate students, special department assignments related to
student advisement, special services to advisees (e.g., petitions, letters of support),
contributions
toward improved advisement, and/or advisement or supervision of student organizations.
9. Participation in instructionally-related training activities such as workshops, seminars,
and conferences. Elements indicative of above expectations in teaching (must meet at
least three
of these for tenure and/or promotion to associate professor and at least five for
promotion to professor)
1. Very good to excellent student evaluations as indicated by the two
SOTE items and written comments from students, as assessed by the
SOTE instrument. As a general guideline for what constitutes very
good to excellent student evaluations, faculty members typically
receive median scores of 5.0 or higher on the two SOTE items, with
predominantly positive themes in student commentary across courses
and time.
2. Extensive student advisement activity, which goes above and beyond
the advising expected of every faculty member (as outlined in the
Meets Expectations section) and includes Departmental Leadership
related to student advising (e.g., PAC, serving as an external member
for a thesis/dissertation) or recognition of advising activity (e.g.,
Outstanding Faculty Advisor Award, student presentation activity).
3. Development of textbooks, workbooks, anthologies, online resources,
or other teaching resources for use in courses beyond an instructor’s
personal course load.
4. Evidence of new course development, instructional innovations, and
contributions to curricula or program change. Such products are often
supported via funding, earn an award, or are recognized and/or used
by entities outside of the department.
5. Teaching awards or other forms of professional recognition.
6. Instructionally-related grants that lead to curriculum and/or new course
development, wherein the fruits of faculty labor are actualized in
course revision or new course offerings.
7. Certifications and/or similar additional training related to teaching and
instructional quality such as CSU sponsored training for certification in
online instruction.

186

II. Research, Scholarly, or Creative Contributions
Psychology faculty members are expected to engage in on-going scholarship. In light of the
diversity of scholarship, the following minimum criteria for tenure and/or promotion to associate
professor apply to all ranked faculty. In order to earn tenure and promotion to the rank of
associate professor, the psychology faculty member is expected to demonstrate the following
accomplishments. For promotion to full professor, a continuation of these accomplishments
across the post-tenure period is required. Elements indicative of meets expectations (all must
be met to be given a rating of meets expectations):
1. Typically obtain at least three scholarly publications (or in press at the time of consideration)
of high quality or at least five scholarly publications of variable quality in some combination of
peer-reviewed journals, or other recognized forms of publication such as books, book
chapters, or monographs. Evidence of high quality publication can be presented in various
forms such as impact factor or citations received. Work disseminated through open-access
publishers that have been identified as predatory will not be counted and such sources can be
identified through a list provided online and through the CSUSB library). Also, since
collaboration is common in psychological research, the level of authorship will be considered to
the extent that it reflects the proportion of each author’s contributions to the manuscript.
The scientific rigor of a faculty member’s scholarship is valued by the Department. Accordingly,
papers in journals with higher impact factors and lower acceptance rates will be weighted more
heavily. The import of impact factors, with regard to a particular area of scholarly work,
should be demonstrated by faculty in their FAR. The procurement of a significant external grant
or contract is generally equivalent to a publication. A significant grant is one that has direct
benefits for the department, students, and/or greater community in the form of indirect
funding, payments for release time, funding opportunities, or service.
2. Regular activity presenting at peer-reviewed regional, national or international professional
meetings. Prestige of presentation will be considered. Evidence of prestige should be presented
in the form of rejection rates or other such indicators.
3. Provision of research opportunities for students. Examples of research opportunities for
students include student authorship on conference presentations, publications, or other manner
of scholarly work or active participation in a faculty research laboratory.
Elements indicative of above expectations (must meet at least three of these for tenure and/or
promotion to associate professor and at least five for promotion to professor)
Publication Activity
1. Publication activity beyond what is indicated above as necessary for a
ranking of meets expectations.

187

Editorial Work
1. Editor or member of an editorial board of a professional journal.
2. Reviewer of manuscripts for professional journals, book chapters for
professional texts, or abstracts for professional society meetings.
3. Reviewer of grant proposals for funding agencies.
4. Membership on committees that utilize professional expertise.
Professional Organizations
5. Mentoring or serving as a research consultant for professional boards,
societies, or individuals.
6. Organizing state, regional, local, or department professional or
research conferences, training, or workshops.
7. Invited presentations at other colleges and universities or at
professional conferences, that are based upon the faculty member’s
scholarly activities and/or reputation.
Continuing Education
8. Participation in continuing education, retraining, and the development
of new skills relevant to one’s current or potential assignment, or area
of scholarly activity, as indicated by completion of courses or
participation in professional conferences, seminars, workshops,
institutes, or special programs which lead to systematic updating of
knowledge or licensure that are above and beyond the requirements
for hire.
Grant Activity
9. Internal grant activity that has resulted in publication or an external
award.
10.Submission or procurement of an external grant or contract.
III. Service
Psychology faculty are expected to make service contributions at multiple levels.
This should include the department, the college and university, and the
community. The latter is broadly construed to include local, city, county, state,
national, or professional groups, agencies, and organizations. In evaluating
service activities, it is important to recognize several factors. One is that there are
numerous, diverse ways in which faculty make service contributions. It is also
understood that while some service activities represent instances of genuine
leadership, others produce significant results through joint effort. Finally, it is
important to note that involvement in leadership roles is especially important for
promotion to full professor. Related to this, there is an expectation that service
activity will grow across time, as faculty move from establishing teaching and
research activity, to serving more fully as a contributing member of the
department, college, and university. Documentation for any and all service

188

activity is expected (e.g., hours spent, duties, meetings attended). Paid activities
do not constitute service to the university.
In order to earn tenure and/or promotion to the rank of associate professor, the
psychology faculty member is expected to demonstrate the following
accomplishments. For promotion to full professor, a continuation and move
towards increased responsibility of these accomplishments across the
post-tenure period is required.
Elements indicative of meets expectations (all must be met to be given a rating of
meets expectations):
1. Serving as a member of university, college, and departmental
committees. It is expected that faculty will serve as a member on at
least one departmental committee per year and one college or
university committee prior to applying for promotion. While committee
placement should not present a challenge due to the size of the
Psychology Department and the number of committees available,
faculty are encouraged to contact the Chair if they are experiencing
difficulty in reaching this expectation. Indications that the faculty is
growing in their commitment to service across time will be evaluated,
as indicated by service on a growing number of committees or
participating in committees for which sustained service is an
expectation.
2. Chairing faculty committees at the university, college, or departmental
level. For tenure and/or promotion to associate professor chairing at
least one committee at any level is sufficient. For promotion to full
faculty should chair at least one departmental committee that requires
significant and sustained work, such as the DEC, or a committee
outside of the department.
3. Sustained (i.e., consecutive appointments involving continuing for an
extended period or without interruption) involvement in at least one
service activity. Sustained activity will vary as a function of each
committee.
Elements indicative of above expectations (must meet at least three of these for
tenure and/or promotion to associate professor and at least five for promotion to
professor)
1. Providing administrative services to the Department such as director of
an undergraduate or graduate program, director of an institute or
center, coordinator for advising services, or associate or assistant
department head.
2. Serving as a consultant to business, not-for-profit organizations, social
service agencies, or other universities.
3. Regularly serving as a judge/adjudicator for an academic or scholarly
competition.
4. Regular or sustained provision of training, guidance, advising, or other

189

manner of professional services to schools, business, institutions,
associations, or not-for-profit organizations.
5. Giving invited lectures to the greater community such as arranged talks
at schools or other community venues on a regular basis.
6. Holding office or otherwise contributing to the governance and
functioning of international, national, or regional associations and
professional organizations.
7. Membership on regional, state, or national professional boards.
8. Serving as an external reviewer for tenure/proposal or department
accreditation.
9. Procurement of grants and/or external contracts that serve students
and/or the institution that do not relate specifically to teaching or
research, scholarly, or creative contributions.

FAM 651.578
PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION DEPARTMENT RPT GUIDELINES
FAM 651.578 Public Administration RPT
Preamble
“Each academic department has the option of preparing written discipline/program specific
guidelines for application of criteria in the areas of teaching, research, scholarly or creative
contributions, and service contained in the Procedures and Criteria for Performance Review and
Periodic Evaluation. These discipline-specific guidelines must strictly conform to the universitywide criteria, and are intended to provide guidance to faculty on those items that tend to have
greater applicability for their academic area. The departmental guidelines are not intended to
supersede the listing of criteria contained in the campus document nor to impose any
pedagogical technique, and as such may not eliminate or exclude any criterion listed in the
areas of teaching, research, scholarly or creative contributions and service” (Procedures and
Criteria for Performance Review and Periodic Evaluation, 2013, p. 41).
Criteria for Performance Review—Teaching
FAM 652.4, previously FAM 300
Chapter 2 A TEACHING
AREAS OF EVALUATION
A. TEACHING
The primary function of the California State University is the provision of rigorous, high quality
instruction. Evidence of teaching effectiveness is crucial to the overall evaluation process of
faculty in the Public Administration Department (PAD).

190

Teaching effectiveness shall be evaluated by the quality of performance of the faculty member
in varied aspects of instruction. These may include, but are not limited to any mode of
instruction; comprehensive exam development and assessment; assurance of learning
activities; supervision of individual and graduate research projects; and student support.
Those persons involved in the evaluation process shall recognize the existence of differences in
teaching styles and student assessment standards. While no single style or manner of teaching
can be established as best for all instructors or for all students, faculty members are expected to
work effectively with students individually and in groups. Evaluation of teaching shall be based
upon the particular methods used by the instructor, and whether or not they are likely to produce
the desired results. PAD faculty must include a brief personal reflection on their professional
growth as an educator. This may include teaching related roles in the department, college, and
university as well as external activities which bring credit to the university and enhance teaching
expertise. External activities related to teaching for other universities will normally be regarded
as service.
Primary sources for evidence concerning the quality of instruction shall be faculty activities
reports, classroom visitation reports, with appended materials gathered during the pre- and
post-visit conferences; SOTEs; alternative teaching evaluation instruments; and syllabi and
major assessment instruments for each new or revised course taught by the faculty member.
The faculty member may include a teaching portfolio. Items appended to classroom visitations
or included from other courses may include (but are not limited to) course syllabi, examinations
and quizzes, hand-out materials, contributions in curricular development, innovations in
teaching, related recognition awards, and other appropriately demonstrative materials.
Evaluation committees, Department Chairs (if applicable), and the appropriate College Dean
shall consider all materials related to teaching, determine the appropriateness and quality of
teaching, and evaluate the faculty member's teaching relative to academic rank. Quality of
instruction shall be evaluated in the following areas:
1. Command of Subject Matter
Credentials presented by a faculty member upon appointment attest to the faculty member's
initial command of the subject matter. However, because refinement and change are inherent in
any area of knowledge, faculty members must possess current knowledge within their area(s) of
expertise.
2. Course Design/Preparation, Instructional Material, and Organization
Faculty members must design or prepare and develop courses that are (a) aligned with course
descriptions, and include learning outcomes and student assessments; (b) organized to include
learning activities and strategies that will achieve course learning outcomes; and (c) delivered
with appropriate instructional materials, including technology. A course syllabus will be designed
and developed for each course in compliance with University requirements. At the beginning of
each course, faculty members should make clear to students the course description, expected
learning outcomes, the design of student assessment mechanisms, and the overall plan for
each course.

191

3. Effectiveness in Instruction
Faculty are required to review and to modify course content regularly to meet changing
curricular needs and developments in the field. PAD faculty must articulate how public service
values are integrated into their classes. Public service values include “pursuing the public
interest with accountability and transparency; serving professionally with competence,
efficiency, and objectivity; acting ethically so as to uphold the public trust; and demonstrating
respect, equity, and fairness in dealings with citizens and fellow public servants” (National
Association of Schools of Public Affairs and Administration, 2009, p. 2).
Instructional effectiveness requires course content to reflect relevance, timeliness, and
comprehensive understanding of central issues and prevailing perspectives in the discipline.
The course content is to be communicated and delivered using suitable instructional modes and
teaching techniques/strategies for instruction in terms of difficulty and relative size of each class.
Demonstration of effectiveness of instruction shall include evidence of periodic pedagogical
training and growth in teaching expertise. This includes development of online teaching skills.
Effectiveness in contributing to student learning is evidenced by SOTEs, course visitation
reports, and the addressing of any issues of concern with improvement over time. In addition,
effective teaching requires that content, organization, and delivery are suitable for both the
overall course and the individual class sessions. Successful experimentation with, and/or
teaching research on, innovative teaching strategies and methods shall also be viewed as
effective teaching.
4. Academic Assessment of Students
Faculty are responsible for fair and thorough assessment of student achievement.Assessment
methods need to be consistent with program goals, course descriptions, and learning outcomes.
Methods of assessment vary markedly, but may include examinations, term papers, written
assignments, applied exercises, group discussions, case studies, presentations, and other
means appropriate to the type of class or instructional mode involved.
Faculty members should make clear to students what measurement mechanisms will be used to
assess student work. They are required to apply standards appropriate to the level of the course
and sufficient to make meaningful distinctions among different levels of student achievement. A
faculty member's methods of assessing student achievement shall be documented by
exemplary copies of items used, as appended to the classroom visitation report or the FAR. As
part of a teaching portfolio, faculty members may also include examples of assessed student
work. 5. Student Support Faculty members are responsible for non-technological course related
support to students. Such support shall model public service values while promoting
professionalism, accessibility, and responsiveness in all student contacts.
APPLICATION OF CRITERIA AND RATING SYSTEM
A. GENERAL PROVISIONS
1. Faculty members who request early promotion are evaluated by the same standards
according to rank as faculty considered at the end of the normal probationary period.

192

2. Faculty members who request early tenure shall be considered to be at the end of the normal
probationary period and be evaluated the same as any faculty requesting tenure or promotion.
In addition, faculty members requesting early tenure shall have demonstrated an outstanding
and sustained record of involvement and achievement, on this campus or elsewhere, indicative
of a commitment to continued professional performance in teaching, research, scholarly or
creative contributions, and service to the University.
3. A faculty member applying for Early Tenure must receive ratings of Meets Expectations or
Above Expectations in each of the categories to be recommended for Early Tenure. A faculty
member applying for Early Promotion must receive ratings of Above Expectations in at least one
category and Meets Expectations or Above Expectations in the final two categories to be
recommended for Early Promotion.
4. In progressing through the levels of Assistant Professor, Associate Professor, and Professor,
an increasingly rigorous application of the criteria shall be applied.
B. RATING SYSTEM IN THE AREA OF TEACHING
1. Rank of Assistant Professor
a. MEETS EXPECTATIONS
During years two and three of the probationary period, the MEETS EXPECTATIONS teacher at
the rank of Assistant Professor must demonstrate satisfactory performance in command and
currency of the subject matter. Strong indications of developing abilities also must be
demonstrated in the other teaching criteria.
During subsequent years, satisfactory performance in all teaching criteria must be evident. The
teaching criteria include the following:
(1) Command and currency of the subject matter.
(2) Design/preparation of courses to deliver appropriate instruction under University
requirements.
(3) Effectiveness in instruction reflecting relevance, public service values, timeliness,
and comprehensive understanding of central issues and prevailing perspectives in the
discipline while appropriately delivered with pedagogical growth in teaching expertise.
(4) Fair and thorough student assessment methods appropriately communicated.
(5) Student support that models public service values while promoting professionalism
and responsiveness in student contacts.
b. ABOVE EXPECTATIONS Exemplary performance in at least three teaching criteria and
satisfactory performance on the remaining criteria.

193

c. BELOW EXPECTATIONS Unsatisfactory performance in one or two of the teaching criteria.
d. WELL BELOW EXPECTATIONS Unsatisfactory or failing performance in three or more of the
teaching criteria.
2. Rank of Associate Professor
a. MEETS EXPECTATIONS
Demonstrated proficiency in each of the five teaching criteria.
b. ABOVE EXPECTATIONS
Exemplary proficiency in at least three teaching criteria and proficiency in the remaining criteria.
Furthermore, the faculty member must meet at least one of the following additional criteria:
(1) A preponderance of evidence demonstrating excellence in teaching as indicated in
classroom visitation reports, SOTEs, the FAR, or additional appropriate documentation
related to teaching.
(2) Demonstrate a record of involvement and achievement indicative of a commitment to
continued professional performance in teaching.
(3) A record of distinction for some aspect of teaching at or beyond the University.
c. BELOW EXPECTATIONS
Unsatisfactory proficiency in one or two of the teaching criteria.
d. WELL BELOW EXPECTATIONS
Unsatisfactory or failing proficiency in three or more of the teaching criteria.
3. Rank of Professor
a. MEETS EXPECTATIONS
Demonstrated proficiency in each of the five teaching criteria and a record of involvement and
achievement indicative of a commitment to continued professional performance in teaching.
b. ABOVE EXPECTATIONS
Exemplary proficiency in at least three teaching criteria and a demonstrated record of
involvement and achievement indicative of a commitment to continued professional
performance in teaching. Furthermore, the faculty member must meet at least one of the
following additional criteria:

194

(1) A preponderance of evidence demonstrating excellence in teaching as indicated in
classroom visitation reports, SOTEs, the FAR, or additional appropriate documentation
related to teaching.
2) A record of distinction for some aspect of teaching at or beyond the University.
c. BELOW EXPECTATIONS
Unsatisfactory proficiency in one or two of the teaching criteria.
d. WELL BELOW EXPECTATIONS
Unsatisfactory or failing proficiency in three or more of the teaching criteria.

PA will not elaborate on the Guidelines in FAM 652.4, previously FAM 300 Chapter 2 B
RESEARCH, SCHOLARLY OR CREATIVE CONTRIBUTIONS
FAM 652.4, previously FAM 300
Chapter 2 C
C. UNIVERSITY AND/OR COMMUNITY SERVICE
University and/or Community Service Guidelines
Public Administration Service RPT Value Statement
The Public Administration (PA) Department at California State University, San Bernardino
values service as an integral part of a faculty member’s work. It is part of the holistic work life of
a faculty member. Service is done to enhance teaching and research as well as providing
service to the department, college, university, and community at large. Public service is a core
value for Public Administration, therefore, public service values are an important component to
PA. We believe in pursuing the public interest with accountability and transparency, serving
professionally with competence, efficiency, and objectivity, acting ethically so as to uphold the
public trust, and demonstrating respect, equity, and fairness in dealing with citizens and fellow
public servants” (NASPAA Accreditation Standards, 2009 p. 2). With this in mind, we believe
that the university guidelines found in FAM 652.4 for service meet the department’s needs with
just a few minor changes to the language.
C. UNIVERSITY AND/OR COMMUNITY SERVICE
In addition to demonstrated teaching effectiveness and continued research, scholarly activity,
faculty members must also participate in professionally related service to the University and
community.

195

1. Scope of University and/or Community Service
Faculty are uniquely qualified to contribute to the mission of the University in a variety of ways,
such as participating in institutional governance, evaluating the teaching of their colleagues,
advising students, sponsoring student organizations, etc.
Community service related to the mission of the University brings recognition not only to the
University but to the faculty as well. Service should be consistent with the teaching abilities,
expertise, and leadership qualities of the faculty member, and should foster an intellectual
relationship with the off-campus community. The term "community" may refer to local, regional,
state, national, or international entities. Service to the University and the community shall be
demonstrated by documented evidence submitted with the FAR. Such documentation should
include descriptive materials that speak to the quantitative and/or qualitative scope of the
service. The following list provides examples of items that may be used. This list provides
examples only and must not be construed as limiting, definitive, or prescriptive in its order.
a. University Service
• Active participation in service to and/or governance of programs, departments,
colleges, the campus, and/or the University System. If a faculty member is given
reassigned time to perform such service or governance, this shall not be considered in
evaluating the quality of such work. However, having received reassigned time may be
considered when evaluating the quantity of such work.
• Attendance and active participation at program, department, and college meetings.
• Active participation on committees at all levels of the University and the University
System, with emphasis on the departmental and the college levels while at the Assistant
Professor rank. • Authorship of documents, reports, or other materials pertinent to the
University's mission or operation.
• Advisor or sponsor to student groups on campus.
• Assisting with grants, documents, contracts, proposals, reports, or other materials
pertinent to the University’s mission or operation.
• Active participation in program, Department, College, Campus and/or University-wide
Advisory Groups.
• Completion of classroom visitation reports.
• Academic and/or career advisement of students.
b. Community Service
1. Service and consultantships at local, state, federal, or international government levels.
2. Consultantships and/or working with community service groups as a board member or
other similar type of contribution. This can also include developing widely disseminated
reports for use by community groups.
3. Media presentations such as interviews, articles, speeches, or other presentations in
newspapers, magazines, radio, television, or film.
4. Lectures, speeches, talks, presentations, and/or displays given to schools, community
groups, or the University community.
5. Judge at science fairs, art shows, music contests, etc.

196

6. Active participation and/or office holding in civic, educational, service, or humanitarian
groups.
7. Participation in community partnership activities which enhance social, economic, and
cultural conditions.
c. Other items related to University and/or community service.
1. Holding office in professional societies or associations at the local, state, national,
and/or international levels.
2. Serving on editorial boards for academic or professional journals.
3. Reviewing manuscripts for academic or professional journals and conferences.
4. Serving as conference program organizers, session chair or paper discussant for
academic conferences or meetings
2. Evaluation of University and/or Community Service
a. The faculty member shall describe and provide documentation for University and/or
community service. Such documentation should include descriptive materials that speak
to the quantitative and/or qualitative scope of the service. Evidence may include, but
shall not be limited to, letters of invitation, memoranda documenting service, programs,
membership lists, and other appropriate items.
This evidence shall be attached to the FAR.
b. The evaluation committees as well as Department Chairs and the appropriate Dean
shall evaluate the nature of the service to the University and/or community. They shall
also determine if it is appropriate to the faculty member's rank.
IV. APPLICATION OF CRITERIA AND RATING SYSTEM (To view Section III and A-C of
Section IV please refer to FAM 652.4 at http://senate.csusb.edu/FAM/Policy/%28FSD85187v1.R20%29RPT_Faculty.pdf)
D. MEETS EXPECTATIONS AND ABOVE EXPECTATIONS IN THE AREA OF UNIVERSITY
AND/OR COMMUNITY SERVICE
1. MEETS EXPECTATIONS in the Area Service
a. At the rank of Assistant Professor
The MEETS EXPECTATIONS faculty member should demonstrate a developing level of
participation particularly at the departmental and college levels within the area of service. (See
above for examples of service activities.) For the purpose of awarding tenure, the MEETS
EXPECTATIONS faculty member must demonstrate significant participation in the area of
service.
b. At the rank of Associate Professor

197

The MEETS EXPECTATIONS faculty member at this rank must demonstrate significant
participation in the area of service. (See above for examples of service activities.) For a faculty
member hired at this rank, a MEETS EXPECTATIONS rating may be assigned for
demonstrating sufficient progress towards achieving this standard by the third probationary
year.
c. At the rank of Professor
In addition to significant participation in service activities, the MEETS EXPECTATIONS faculty
member is expected to provide effective leadership in some of these activities. (See above for
examples of service activities.) For a faculty member hired at this rank, a MEETS
EXPECTATIONS rating may be assigned for demonstrating sufficient progress towards
achieving this standard by the third probationary year.
2. Above Expectations in the Area of Service
A rating of ABOVE EXPECTATIONS in this area is awarded for exceptional service that has
been clearly documented as to quantity and quality. To be considered ABOVE EXPECTATIONS
in the area of service, the faculty member must meet the FSD: 14-05 FAM 651.578 Previous
FAM N/A Last Revision 2015: FAC 12 qualifications set forth above for MEETS
EXPECTATIONS appropriate to academic rank. In addition, the faculty member must
demonstrate exceptional effectiveness or performance as a contributor or leader in the
University, the off-campus community, or a combination of both.

FAM 651.576 SCHOOL OF SOCIAL WORK
DEPARTMENTAL/SCHOOL GUIDELINES FOR THE EVALUATION OF
PROBATIONARY AND TENURE TRACK FACULTY, INCLUDING POSTTENURE REVIEW

I. OVERVIEW
Each academic department/school has the option of preparing written discipline/program
specific guidelines for application of criteria in the areas of teaching, research, scholarly, and
creative contributions, and service contained in the Procedures and Criteria for Performance
Review and Periodic Evaluation. These discipline-specific guidelines must strictly conform to
the universitywide criteria, and are intended to provide guidance to faculty on those items
that tend to have greater applicability for their academic area. The departmental/school
guidelines are not intended to supersede the listing of criteria contained in the campus
document nor to impose any pedagogical technique, and as such may not eliminate or
exclude any criterion listed in the areas of teaching, research, scholarly, and creative
contributions and service.
II. GUIDELINES

198

1. Teaching Departments may describe, in general terms, instructional techniques or
pedagogical approaches which are perhaps better suited for the discipline/program. Each
faculty member may have the option of including Student Assessment of Supervisory
Effectiveness (SASE) results to help assess teaching effectiveness. The departmental/school
SASE form is shown in Attachment 1.
III. PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL
Department Chairs/School Directors are responsible for ensuring that the guidelines are
developed, or amended, with the full participation of all tenured and tenure-track faculty
Last Revision 2000: FAC FSD: 99-16 FAM 651.576 Previous FAM 306 2 in the
department/school and in consultation with the appropriate College Dean. Guidelines and
any subsequent modifications must receive approval from a majority of the
Department/School faculty, and approval through the normal faculty senate process, prior
to implementation. Faculty senate consideration shall be limited to determining whether or
not the proposed guidelines fall within the general parameters of the Procedures and
Criteria for Performance Review and Periodic Evaluation document.
IV. DISTRIBUTION OF GUIDELINES
Department Chairs/School Directors are responsible for distributing copies of
department/school guidelines each Fall to faculty involved in the review process. For new
faculty, Chairs/Directors shall both provide a written copy of the guidelines and meet with
the individuals to discuss the content of guidelines.

Attachment 1
STUDENT ASSESSMENT OF SUPERVISORY EFFECTIVENESS
School of Social Work
No.
Point to Evaluate
Excellent
Good

Fair

Poor

1. Rate how well your liaison made themselves available to you for consultation and
problem solving as necessary
2. Rate how well prepared your liaison was to address client, agency, procedural or other
field issues that were important to you
3. Rate the quality of the feedback that you received on your learning agreement
4. Rate how well your liaison was able to hear, understand, and assess any questions, issues,
or concerns that you may have had regarding your field experience
5. Rate how well your liaison responded to questions, issues, or concerns you raised
regarding your field experience
199

6. Rate your liaison's ability to mediate any difficulties or differences in expectations among
you, the agency, and the school
7. Rate the level of your liaison's ability to facilitate your field learning
8. Rate the quality of the feedback that you received regarding your progress from your
liaison during their visits to your field agency
9. Rate the quality of assistance that your liaison provided in addressing any special
academic needs that you presented
10. Rate the overall effectiveness of your liaison Please continue on back page [Comments
on back] Last Revision 2000: FAC

FAM 651.579 DEPARTMENT OF CHILD DEVELOPMENT
Guidelines for the Evaluation of
Probationary and Tenure Line Faculty
Each section below (teaching, research, scholarly, or creative contributions, and
service) delineates what is considered necessary to meet expectations when applying
for tenure and/or promotion and are aligned with the FAM. Information is also provided
regarding activities that are considered to be above expectations (in the event that all
aspects of performance considered to be a marker of meets expectations have been
met). Faculty who are missing elements of practice considered to be necessary for
meeting expectations may be rated as below expectations or well below expectations as
indicated in the FAM.
According to the current FAM (652.4), “the President or designee may award tenure to a
faculty member after a six-year probationary period. Upon application by a candidate
and consideration of positive recommendations from evaluation committees,
Department Chairs, and/or College Dean, the President or designee may award tenure
before the end of the six-year probationary period.” The FAM also notes that “a
probationary faculty member shall normally be considered for promotion at the same
time he/she is considered for tenure.” In addition to these guidelines, revisions of the
FAM indicate that four years of service (including service credit, if applicable) is required
to be eligible to apply for promotion to associate professor and there is no retroactive
application of the new criteria to faculty who came in under the old criteria. The FAM
does not specifically address an expected timeframe for promotion from Associate
Professor to Full but it should be noted that as of 2020 the FAM states that “an
associate professor may apply for promotion to Professor earlier but not until after three
years of service, i.e., in the fourth year since promotion to Associate. The expectation is
that benchmarks, such as those outlined in the document below, will be met for anyone
wishing to apply for promotion to Full Professor.

200

Faculty being evaluated with regard to retention should either demonstrate success in
attaining indicators necessary to be rated as meeting or above expectations or
demonstrate progress towards acquiring these benchmarks. In addition, faculty being
evaluated for retention will be judged in terms of progress towards what is needed at the
time of tenure and/or promotion.
According to the FAM, to be considered for tenure, faculty should score at least meets
expectations in all three areas (teaching, research, scholarly, or creative contributions,
and service). To be considered for promotion (either to associate professor or
professor), faculty should score at least meets expectations in two areas and above
expectations in at least one area. Faculty rated as below expectations or well below
expectations in any of the three areas will not be granted tenure and/or promotion.
I.

Teaching

Faculty in the Department of Child Development are expected to demonstrate
proficiency in several areas of teaching including command of subject matter, course
preparation and organization, instructional material, effectiveness of instruction,
academic assessment, and student advisement, supervision, and mentorship.
Proficiency shall be determined on the basis of student evaluations, course materials,
peer review of teaching, developed curriculum materials, evidence of student
supervision/mentoring, outcome measures of effectiveness, and/or other instructional
contributions to the department.
In order to earn tenure and promotion to the rank of associate professor, the child
development faculty member is expected to demonstrate the following
accomplishments. Accomplishments vary with regard to a rating of meets versus above
expectations, as noted below. For promotion to full professor, a continuation of these
accomplishments across the post-tenure period is required.
Elements indicative of meets expectations (all must be met to be given a rating of meets
expectations):
1. Classroom visitation reports that are consistently positive with regard to the
various areas of classroom teaching described above.
2. Predominantly positive student evaluations, including the written comments,
as assessed by the SOTE instrument. As a general guideline for what
constitutes predominantly positive student evaluations, faculty members
typically receive median scores of at least 4.5 or higher on the two SOTE
items (or demonstrate progression to this standard over time), with an
absence of negative themes in student commentary across courses and time.
3. Course materials that are judged current and reflective of research-based and
departmental standards.

201

4. Course materials and course approach that demonstrate comprehensive and
objective coverage. Examples of objective coverage include the presentation
of research-based evidence, opportunity to discuss and debate controversial
topics, and use of evidence-based sources of written material.
5. Evidence of individual mentoring of undergraduate and/or graduate students
resulting in tangible student accomplishments. Mentoring may include the
supervision of honors students, the chairing of thesis/project committees,
directing independent study projects and internships, supervising student
presentations, and participating as a reader on thesis/project committees.
6. Evidence in the form of syllabi and course materials that expectations for
student performance are appropriately rigorous and challenging. This can
include, but is not limited to, evidence-based reading materials appropriate to
the course level, assignments that encourage critical thinking, and high
impact practices.
7. Evidence of being generally available and accessible to students, as
reflected, for example, in student comments on the SOTEs and consistently
providing the requisite number of hours for office hours.
8. Evidence of student advisement activities. This could include advisement of
individual undergraduate and graduate students, special department
assignments related to student advisement, special services to advisees
(e.g., petitions, letters of support), contributions toward improved advisement,
and/or advisement or supervision of student organizations.
9. Participation in instructionally-related training activities such as workshops,
seminars, and conferences.
Elements indicative of above expectations in teaching (must meet at least three of these
for tenure and/or promotion to associate professor and at least five for promotion to
professor)
1. Very good to excellent student evaluations as indicated by the two SOTE
items and written comments from students, as assessed by the SOTE
instrument. As a general guideline for what constitutes very good to excellent
student evaluations, faculty members typically receive median scores of 5.0
or higher on the two SOTE items, with predominantly positive themes in
student commentary across courses and time.
2. Extensive student advisement activity, which goes above and beyond the
advising expected of every faculty member (as outlined in the Meets
Expectations section) and includes Departmental Leadership related to
student advising (e.g., serving as an external member for a
thesis/dissertation) or recognition of advising activity (e.g., Outstanding
Faculty Advisor Award, student presentation activity).
3. Development of textbooks, workbooks, anthologies, online resources, or other
teaching resources for use in courses beyond an instructor’s personal course
load. Not including self-published work.
4. Evidence of new course development, instructional innovations, and
contributions to curricula or program change. Such products are often

202

supported via funding, earn an award, or are recognized and/or used by
entities outside of the department.
5. Teaching awards or other forms of professional recognition related to
teaching.
6. Instructionally-related grants that lead to curriculum and/or new course
development, wherein the fruits of faculty labor are actualized in course
revision or new course offerings.
7. Certifications and/or similar additional training related to teaching and
instructional quality such as CSU sponsored training for certification in online
instruction.
II.

Research, Scholarly, or Creative Contributions

Child Development faculty members are expected to engage in ongoing scholarship. In
light of the diversity of scholarship, the following minimum criteria for tenure and/or
promotion to associate professor apply to all ranked faculty.
In order to earn tenure and promotion to the rank of associate professor, the child
development faculty member is expected to demonstrate the following
accomplishments. For promotion to full professor, a continuation of these
accomplishments across the post-tenure period is required.
Elements indicative of meets expectations (all must be met to be given a rating of meets
expectations):
1. Typically have at least three scholarly publications (or in press at the time of
consideration) of high quality or at least five scholarly publications of variable
quality in some combination of peer-reviewed journals, or other recognized
forms of publication such as books, book chapters, or monographs. Evidence
of high quality publication can be presented in various forms such as impact
factor or citations received. Work disseminated through open-access
publishers that have been identified as predatory will not be counted and such
sources can be identified through a list provided online and through the
CSUSB library). Also, since collaboration is common in child development
research reviewers will consider level of contribution when weighing
collaborative efforts. The scientific rigor of a faculty member’s scholarship is
valued by the Department. Accordingly, papers in journals with higher impact
factors and lower acceptance rates will be weighted more heavily. The import
of impact factors, with regard to a particular area of scholarly work, should be
demonstrated by faculty in their FAR. The procurement of a significant
external research grant or contract (as the principal investigator) could be
used in place of one high quality publication. A significant grant is one that
has direct benefits for the department, students, and/or greater community in
the form of indirect funding, payments for release time, funding opportunities,
or service.
203

2. Regular activity presenting at peer-reviewed regional, national or international
professional meetings. Prestige of presentation will be considered. Evidence
of prestige should be presented in the form of rejection rates or other such
indicators.
3. Provision of research opportunities for students. Examples of research
opportunities for students include student authorship on conference
presentations, publications, or other manner of scholarly work or active
participation in a faculty research laboratory.
Elements indicative of above expectations (must meet at least three of these for tenure
and/or promotion to associate professor and at least five for promotion to professor)
Publication Activity
1. Publication activity beyond what is indicated above as necessary for a ranking
that meets expectations.
Editorial Work
1. Editor or member of an editorial board of a professional journal.
2. Reviewer of manuscripts for professional journals, book chapters for
professional texts, or abstracts for professional society meetings.
3. Reviewer of grant proposals for funding agencies.
4. Membership on committees that utilize professional expertise.
Professional Organizations
5. Mentoring or serving as a research consultant for professional boards,
societies, or individuals.
6. Organizing state, regional, local, or department professional or research
conferences, training, or workshops.
7. Invited scholarly or research presentations at other colleges and universities
or at professional conferences, that are based upon the faculty member’s
scholarly activities and/or reputation.
Continuing Education
8. Participation in continuing education, retraining, and the development of new
skills relevant to one’s current or potential assignment, or area of scholarly
activity, as indicated by completion of courses or participation in professional
conferences, seminars, workshops, institutes, or special programs which lead
to systematic updating of knowledge or licensure that are above and beyond
the requirements for hire.
Grant Activity
9. Internal grant activity that has resulted in publication or an external award.
10. Submission or procurement of an external grant or contract.
III.

Service

204

Child Development faculty are expected to make service contributions at multiple levels.
This should include the department, the college and university, and the community. The
latter is broadly construed to include local, city, county, state, national, or professional
groups, agencies, and organizations. In evaluating service activities, it is important to
recognize several factors. One is that there are numerous, diverse ways in which faculty
make service contributions. It is also understood that while some service activities
represent instances of genuine leadership, others produce significant results through
joint effort. Finally, it is important to note that involvement in leadership roles is
especially important for promotion to full professor. Related to this, there is an
expectation that service activity will grow across time, as faculty move from establishing
teaching and research activity, to serving more fully as a contributing member of the
department, college, and university. Documentation for any and all service activity is
expected (e.g., hours spent, duties, meetings attended). Paid activities do not
constitute service to the university.
In order to earn tenure and/or promotion to the rank of associate professor, the child
development faculty member is expected to demonstrate the following
accomplishments. For promotion to full professor, a continuation and move towards
increased responsibility of these accomplishments across the post-tenure period is
required.
Elements indicative of meets expectations (all must be met to be given a rating of meets
expectations):
1. Serving as a member of university, college, and departmental committees. It
is expected that faculty will serve as a member on at least one departmental
committee per year and one college or university committee prior to applying
for promotion. While committee placement should not present a challenge
due to the size of the Department of Child Development and the number of
committees available, faculty are encouraged to contact the Chair if they are
experiencing difficulty in reaching this expectation. Indications that the faculty
is growing in their commitment to service across time will be evaluated, as
indicated by service on a growing number of committees or participating in
committees for which sustained service is an expectation.
2. Chairing faculty committees at the university, college, or departmental level.
For tenure and/or promotion to associate professor chairing at least one
committee at any level is sufficient. For promotion to full faculty should chair
at least one departmental committee that requires significant and sustained
work, such as the DEC, or a committee outside of the department.
3. Sustained (i.e., consecutive appointments involving continuing for an
extended period or without interruption) involvement in at least one service
activity. Sustained activity will vary as a function of each committee.
Elements indicative of above expectations (must meet at least three of these for tenure
and/or promotion to associate professor and at least five for promotion to professor)

205

1. Providing administrative services to the Department such as director of an
undergraduate or graduate program, director of an institute or center,
coordinator for advising services, or associate or assistant department head.
2. Serving as a consultant to business, not-for-profit organizations, social
service agencies, or other universities.
3. Regularly serving as a judge/adjudicator for an academic or scholarly
competition.
4. Regular or sustained provision of training, guidance, advising, or other
manner of professional services to schools, business, institutions,
associations, or not-for-profit organizations.
5. Giving invited lectures to the greater community such as arranged talks at
schools or other community venues on a regular basis.
6. Holding office or otherwise contributing to the governance and functioning of
international, national, or regional associations and professional
organizations.
7. Membership on regional, state, or national professional boards.
8. Serving as an external reviewer for tenure/proposal or department
accreditation.
9. Procurement of grants and/or external contracts that serve students and/or
the institution that do not relate specifically to teaching or research, scholarly,
or creative contributions.

FAM 651.580
DEPARTMENT OF BIOLOGY GUIDELINES FOR THE
EVALUATION OF TENURE-LINE FACULTY

Introduction
The purpose of these departmental guidelines is to provide faculty applying for retention, tenure
or promotion, and the committees and administrators evaluating them, with guidance regarding
meeting and/or exceeding Departmental and University expectations. This document clarifies the
meaning of the University criteria specified in FAM 652.1 (previously FAM 300) in terms of the
specific disciplinary and departmental context of Biology at CSUSB. The Department
Evaluation Committee (DEC) and the Department Chair (Chair) will evaluate the documentation
submitted under each category listed below on a case-by-case basis in order to determine both
the quality and significance of the overall contribution of the faculty member being evaluated to
the advancement of the science and practice of biology, and to the mission of the Department of
Biology. The mission of the Department is to provide high-quality training in the science of
Biology, so as to prepare students (undergraduate and graduate) for entry-level careers in
science, to pursue advanced training in graduate and professional schools, and to contribute to

206

the science of biology through faculty and students conducting and disseminating research in this
field.
Overview of the Retention, Tenure and Promotion Process
The University document FAM 652.1 states that candidates will be evaluated in three basic
areas:
Teaching
Research, Scholarly or Creative Contributions
University and/or Community Service
Evidence of achievements in these three areas shall be presented in the form of a Faculty
Activities Report (FAR) (See FAM 652.1 for details on preparing a FAR and any additional
documentation). All faculty members who are subject to periodic evaluation or performance
review have the sole responsibility for assembling the FAR and providing the necessary
explanations and documentation. Nonetheless, if the DEC or the Chair finds any deficiencies in
the faculty member’s documentation of teaching, and/or research, scholarly and creative
contributions, and/or service contributions, the committee or chair may request clarification,
expansion, or additional information from the faculty member through the Office of Faculty
Affairs and Development before preparing an evaluation. Evidence of achievement shall
encompass only the period under review (see FAM 652.1 for details). A faculty member subject
to future performance review should begin assembling the appropriate materials as soon as
possible, and should maintain and continually update his or her FAR. Each faculty member is
responsible for ensuring that items included in his or her FAR are explained and appropriately
documented. Failure to do so could result in the DEC and/or Chair not considering that item for
evaluation. Items listed in more than one category should be noted as such, and their
contribution to each category explained.
As per FAM 652.1, faculty members under review will be rated for each of the three areas noted
above as ABOVE EXPECTATIONS, MEETS EXPECTATIONS, BELOW
EXPECTATIONS, or WELL BELOW EXPECTATIONS. Although faculty members are
given separate ratings for each of these three areas in each area of evaluation (i.e., tenure,
promotion), the Department recognizes that the three areas are related and should be looked at
collectively. In assigning ratings, the DEC and Chair will also take into account the faculty
member’s overall contribution to the Department.
For retention after the second year, a faculty member should at least meet expectations in at
least two categories and should be rated no lower than below expectations in the third category.
A rating of below expectations in two categories and meets expectations or higher in the third
category is also permissible for retention but will result in recommendations from the President
or designee as to what needs to be done to obtain successful future reviews.
For retention after the fourth year, a faculty member should at least meet expectations in all
three categories. A rating of below expectations in one category is permissible for retention but
will result in recommendations from the President or designee as to what needs to be done to
obtain successful future reviews.

207

For tenure, a faculty member must at least meet expectations at present rank in all three
categories.
To earn a positive recommendation for promotion from the DEC and Chair, the faculty member
must earn an evaluation of above expectations (at the present rank) in at least one of the three
categories, TEACHING, RESEARCH or SERVICE, with a minimum rating of meets
expectations (at the present rank) in the other two. The faculty member is strongly encouraged
to work towards an above expectations record in Teaching and/or Research as above
expectations in service would normally require serving in leadership roles that are usually
unavailable to junior faculty.
In the case of a rating below or well below expectations (at any rank) the DEC and/or Chair
shall explain and justify the rating.
Guidelines
A. TEACHING IN THE BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES
The Department of Biology follows the criteria for performance review as set forth below in
accordance with the University document FAM 652.4. One instrument used in evaluations as
specified in the FAM is student evaluations. While we describe the usage of the student
evaluations herein, an important postscript to this section (see below) describes why the
Department of Biology devalues student evaluations as a meaningful instrument for evaluating
teaching effectiveness.
The categories considered for evaluation include:
1. Command of Subject Matter
Command of subject matter is assessed by classroom visitation reports and by instructional
materials submitted by the faculty member under review as attachments to his or her FAR.
Student evaluations also provide an indication of student perceptions of the faculty member’s
command of the subject matter. Student comments are taken into consideration in the context of
the other indicators mentioned below, with the understanding that students have a limited basis
on which to judge a faculty member’s command of the subject matter. Student perceptions of a
faculty member’s command of the subject matter may be colored by a number of factors such as
the instructor’s confidence level, the instructor’s ease in relating to students, and the student’s
degree of comfort with the instructor’s teaching style. These factors are important in creating a
positive learning environment for students, but do not necessarily provide reliable indicators of
command of the subject matter. The FAR should also document the faculty member’s efforts to
remain abreast of new developments in the fields in which he or she teaches, including evidence
of conference attendance, evidence of reading current literature in the field, and incorporating
new advances in the field into his or her classes, where appropriate.
2. Course Design/Preparation, Instructional Material, and Organization
Course design/preparation, instructional materials and organization are assessed by syllabi and

208

by samples of teaching materials attached to the FAR, as well as by classroom visitation reports
and student evaluations. The faculty member may also include statements in his or her FAR
describing the rationale for the design and organization of his or her courses. The faculty
member should also describe in his or her FAR his or her contribution to departmental curricular
initiatives, including any new courses that were proposed and/or developed.
3. Effectiveness of Instruction
Effectiveness in teaching is assessed by student evaluations, by classroom visitation reports, and
by samples of teaching materials attached to the FAR. The faculty member may also comment
in his or her FAR on their own observations as to what particular aspects of their teaching have
been most effective.
4. Academic Assessment of Students
Academic assessment of students is evaluated by samples of tests, quizzes, assignments, etc.,
attached to the FAR. As noted in FAM 652.4, faculty may also attach samples of assessed
student work (with student identifying information removed). Student comments on the types of
assessment, on the clarity of instructions for assessments, and particularly on the quality of
feedback received are also taken into consideration. Course syllabi are also reviewed for clarity
of explanation of the assessments used in the course.
In addition, a faculty member may also optionally submit evidence of participation in the
collection and review of departmentally agreed upon (and/or individually developed, coursebased) assessment measures, and by designing and implementing new exercises and/or new
methods of teaching (e.g., active learning) aimed at improving student performance. Faculty
may also include documentation to illustrate success in helping students achieve course-based or
departmental learning outcomes.
All of these criteria are evaluated and used in assessing the faculty member’s performance under
this heading. Classroom and laboratory instruction, as well as supervision of individual student
projects (undergraduate and graduate), and supervision of research (undergraduate and graduate),
are the primary areas of consideration of teaching effectiveness.
For supervision courses, the faculty member should include in the FAR a list of supervision
courses taught during the period under review that includes the semester and year the course was
taught, names of students supervised, and titles of research projects undertaken by each student.
For regular courses, please attach syllabi for all courses taught during the period under review.
Normally one representative syllabus for each course is sufficient, but if any significant changes
occurred in either the teaching of a particular course or in the syllabus itself during the period of
review, then a copy of the syllabus showing these changes should also be attached. Although
samples of instructional materials and assessment instruments are normally attached to the
classroom visitation reports, faculty should also submit samples of instructional and/or
assessment materials they have developed in classes not visited during the period under review in
order to fully document their commitment to effective teaching.
Postscript

209

Student evaluations, regardless of whether they are quantitative or qualitative, are inherently
biased and may have biases founded in gender (Mitchell and Martin, 2018), nonverbal behavior
or physical appearance (Ambady et al., 1993), sexual orientation (Russ et al., 2010), or race
(Reid, 2010). As such, these types of evaluation instruments may be discriminatory. The Dept. of
Biology recognizes that student evaluations are an instrument of evaluation officially mandated
by the Collective Bargaining Agreement with the California Faculty Association, and that it is
important for student voices to be heard. Nonetheless, we are cognizant of the severe
shortcomings of student evaluations, and we believe that its role in making decisions on
promotion and retention should be strongly diminished; our DEC evaluations will reflect this
point of view.
References:
Ambady, Nalini, Rosenthal, and Robert (1993). Half a minute: predicting teacher evaluations
from thin slices of nonverbal behavior and physical attractiveness. J. Personal. Soc. Behav.
64(3):431-441.
Mitchell and Martin (2018). Gender bias in student evaluations. Polit. Sci. & Policy 51(3):648652. doi:10.1017/S104909651800001X
Reid (2010). The role of perceived race and gender in the evaluation of college teaching on
ratemyprofessors.com. J. Diver. Higher Ed. 3(3):137-152. doi:10.1037/a0019865
Russ, Simonds, and Hunt (2010). Coming out in the classroom... an occupational hazard? The
influence of sexual orientation on teacher credibility and perceived student learning. Comm. Ed.
51,2002(3):311-324. doi:10.1080/03634520216516

MEETS EXPECTATIONS OR ABOVE EXPECTATIONS IN THE AREA OF
TEACHING
Meets Expectations
a. At the rank of Assistant Professor
During years two and three of the probationary period, the MEETS EXPECTATIONS faculty
member at the rank of Assistant Professor must demonstrate command of the subject matter.
Strong indications of developing abilities must also be demonstrated in the other teaching
criteria. During subsequent years, proficiency in all teaching criteria must be evident.
b. At the rank of Associate Professor
The MEETS EXPECTATIONS faculty member at the rank of Associate Professor must
demonstrate proficiency in each of the four teaching criteria. See above for examples.

210

c. At the rank of Professor
The MEETS EXPECTATIONS teacher at the rank of Professor must continue to demonstrate
proficiency in each of the four teaching criteria (see above for examples).
In addition, he or she must also demonstrate a record of involvement and achievement indicative
of a commitment to continued professional performance in teaching. Involvement can be
demonstrated by participating in departmental curricular initiatives, by continuing to develop
new courses when needed, by updating content in existing courses, by participating in collection
and review of departmentally agreed upon (and/or individually developed, course-based)
assessment measures, by designing and implementing new exercises and/or new methods of
teaching (e.g., active learning) aimed at improving student performance, etc. Achievement may
be demonstrated by exercising leadership in departmental curricular initiatives, by successful
approval and teaching of new courses proposed, and/or by SOTE scores that show evidence of
excellence in teaching.
Above Expectations
To be considered ABOVE EXPECTATIONS in the area of teaching, the faculty member must
meet the requirements set forth above for MEETS EXPECTATIONS appropriate to rank. In
addition, the faculty member must provide clear documentation as to quality of performance in at
least one of the following additional criteria:
a. A preponderance of evidence in the FAR demonstrating excellence in teaching as indicated by
1) classroom visitation reports, 2) student evaluations, 3) additional appropriate documentation
related to teaching.
b. At the rank of Assistant Professor and Associate Professor, demonstrate a record of
involvement and achievement indicative of a commitment to continued professional performance
in teaching. This can be demonstrated by participating in departmental curricular initiatives, by
continuing to develop new courses when needed, by updating content in existing courses, by
participating in collection and review of departmentally agreed upon (and/or individually
developed, course-based) assessment measures, by designing and implementing new exercises
and/or new methods of teaching (e.g., active learning) aimed at improving student performance,
etc.
c. Provide a fully documented record of an award for some aspect of teaching within or outside
of the University, or provide information related to a nomination for a teaching-related award,
e.g. nomination letter(s) and or form(s) that clearly document the faculty member’s excellence in
teaching. Examples of such awards include but are not limited to the Golden Apple Award, the
College of Natural Sciences Outstanding Professor for Teaching Award, etc. In addition, the
publication of a laboratory manual or textbook by a nationally/internationally recognized
publishing house (cross-listed with Research) provides evidence of excellence in a teaching
related activity.
B. RESEARCH, SCHOLARLY AND CREATIVE CONTRIBUTIONS IN THE
BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES

211

All Department of Biology faculty members are expected to be active in research. Acceptable
scholarship may take a variety of forms and may evolve over the course of a career. Specific
examples are explained in the Priority lists below. The Department of Biology recognizes that
the nature of research and scholarly activities conducted by biologists depends on many factors,
including the faculty member’s expertise, disciplinary and sub-disciplinary frameworks,
methods, and publication practices. Given this diversity, the Department has not fully quantified
criteria for “meets expectations” and “above expectations”. The Department of Biology
expects that faculty members will be active in research throughout their careers. The DEC and
Chair considers each case on its own merits. To this end the DEC and Chair look not just at the
faculty member’s number of publications, but also at the faculty member’s research productivity
in terms of its originality, quality, consistency, and the importance of the faculty member’s
scholarly contribution to his or her field of the biological sciences.
Primary consideration in the evaluation of a faculty member’s research efforts is the quality of
the research and publications. The guidelines below specify a quantitative range of products
and/or activities that are expected at each rank, but within this range, the Department recognizes
that a small number of high-quality publications may be as valuable as, or more valuable than, a
large number of lower quality publications. For publications, the quality of the article is
evaluated, regardless of the journal in which it is published. However, peer-reviewed
publications receive more weight than non-peer reviewed publications. In cases where the nature
of the review process for a particular publication may not be common, the faculty member
should document not only the publication of the article but also the type of review it underwent.
For co-authored articles, the first authorship and corresponding authorship (which is typically
last authorship in journals in the biological sciences) is counted most heavily, but co-authored
publications also count toward the ranges listed below. For all co-authored publications, the
faculty member’s contribution should be thoroughly described and documented, including any
particular mechanisms the journal in question uses to determine order of authorship. The
Department of Biology also places high value on the inclusion of student co-workers in faculty
research, and for that reason publications with student co-authors are given special consideration
in the evaluation process. The Department of Biology recognizes that the faculty member may
have the role of the senior author, or the corresponding author, despite not being listed as the first
author, and this is given special consideration in the evaluation process.
As with publications, peer-reviewed research proposals to recognized external
agencies/institutions on which the faculty member is the sole or principal investigator are
considered important. In addition, the Department recognizes the value of collaborative
research, particularly interdisciplinary research, for the advancement of science. For cases of
collaborative work, the faculty member’s contribution to the proposal must be fully documented.
Additionally, research proposals that provide funding for student research reinforce the faculty
member’s application for tenure and/or promotion.
The criteria for meeting or exceeding expectations within the Department of Biology are
dominantly taken from the area termed below as Productivity, with additional consideration if
substantial activity is evident in Recognition and/or Professional Service. Productivity has been
subdivided into three priorities with Priority 1 being the most important in terms of assessing a

212

faculty member’s contribution in terms of meeting expectations or being above expectations.
The categories within each priority are not listed in order of importance. In all cases below,
publications with CSUSB students as co-authors will be given greater weight in consideration, to
reflect the significance the Department of Biology places on faculty-student mentorship.
PRODUCTIVITY
Priority 1: Items in one or more of the categories below are considered essential in
order to meet expectations in year 6 at the rank of assistant professor as well as
at all higher ranks.
● Authorship or co-authorship of research articles published in appropriate
discipline-specific, widely circulated, blind peer-reviewed journals, published by
recognized professional societies or publishing houses.
● Authorship or co-authorship of research articles published in other nationally or
internationally recognized, blind peer-reviewed regular publication series, such as
Memoirs, Special Papers, or other multi-author special-focus volumes.
● Authorship or co-authorship of entire volumes of research results, such as
Monographs, Memoirs, Special Papers, blind peer-reviewed and professionally
edited and published by nationally or internationally recognized professional
societies or publishing houses.
● Authorship or co-authorship of major review articles in blind peer-reviewed series
(Annual Reviews, etc.) that summarize the state of knowledge in the faculty
member’s discipline.
● Authorship or co-authorship of peer-reviewed textbook(s) in the faculty member’s
field published by a nationally/internationally recognized publishing house (crosslisted with Teaching under above expectations).
● Principal Investigator or co-Investigator on successful grant applications for
external funding. Additional recognition is given to funding from highly
competitive sources (e.g., the National Institutes of Health, National Science
Foundation, etc.). It is expected that research funding will normally lead to peerreviewed publications or to other disseminated products, but it is understood that
this may take several years depending on the type of research.
● Principal Investigator or co-Investigator on successful grant applications for
external funding from specialized funding sources (e.g., private foundations, nonprofit organizations, etc.). This becomes more important if it supports research
that results in major publications and/or significant external funding from more
competitive sources.
Priority 2: Items in these categories are viewed as positive signs that progress is
being made toward the essential items above. They are considered sufficient to
meet expectations for retention at years 2 and 4. Activity in one or more of these
areas is also considered necessary but normally not sufficient on its own to meet
expectations in year 6 at the rank of assistant professor or at higher ranks.
● Authorship or co-authorship of abstracts or presentations of research work
presented at regional, national, or international professional conferences.
Abstracts that involve student co-authors will be given special consideration. It is

213

●
●
●
●
●

expected that at least some of the work that is presented in abstract form will
eventually lead to peer-reviewed publications.
Authorship or co-authorship of conference publications. Blind peer-reviewed
work carries more weight than those that are not so reviewed.
Principal Investigator (or PI for the campus on multi-institution proposals) on
external funding for non-research grants.
Supervision of student research (undergraduate and graduate) that is expected to
lead to presentations and/or publications with students as co-authors.
Principal Investigator or co-Investigator on successful proposals for funding from
on-campus sources. This becomes more important if it produces research results
that result in major publications and/or significant external funding.
Principal Investigator or co-Investigator on unsuccessful proposals written to
external funding agencies to fund research work.

Priority 3: Important for Retention, useful for Promotion and Tenure but not
sufficient on their own. Items in this category are sufficient to meet expectations
at year 2 at the assistant professor rank. In later years and at higher rank items
in these categories demonstrate activity toward meeting expectations but are not
in themselves sufficient to meet expectations.
● Principal Investigator or co-Investigator on unsuccessful proposals written to
internal funding agencies to fund research work
● Authoring other books, such as general interest treatments of the faculty
member’s discipline. This becomes more important if published by a recognized
publishing house.
● Authorship or co-authorship of subsequent editions of textbook(s) in the faculty
member’s field published by a nationally/internationally recognized publishing
house. Documented evidence that the textbook was significantly rewritten, could
move this achievement into the corresponding category in Priority 1.

●
●
●
●

PROFESSIONAL RECOGNITION
Important additional material. Not required, but adds strength to an application
for Retention, Promotion and/or Tenure. Provides evidence for off-campus
recognition of faculty member’s research.
Receipt of an honor or award from a professional society.
Election to Fellowship in a professional society.
Being named as a Distinguished Lecturer in a professional society or organization.
Receipt of an honor or award from professional or educational entities, other than
professional societies.
PROFESSIONAL SERVICE
Useful for Retention, Promotion and Tenure but not sufficient on their own.

●

Participation (e.g. departmental representative) in non-research grants (e.g., grants for
student scholarships and outreach grants).

● Authoring general interest articles in the faculty member’s discipline.
● Proposal and manuscript reviews.
● Serving on proposal review panels.

214

● Appointment as editor or assistant editor for a discipline-recognized journal or other
publication series.
● Service to professional societies (e.g., meeting-planning committees, technical program
committees, development work, governance roles).
The last four activities also provide a measure of the faculty member’s service to the
scientific community, and as such are also considered under Service.
MEETS EXPECTATIONS AND ABOVE EXPECTATIONS IN THE AREA OF
RESEARCH
Meets Expectations
a. At the rank of Assistant Professor
During years two and three of the probationary period, the MEETS EXPECTATIONS faculty
member at the rank of Assistant Professor must demonstrate the steps toward a viable research
program as indicated by items listed under Priority 2.
By year 4, the faculty member must show documented evidence of continued active involvement
in, and successful completion of professionally evaluated activities from within Priorities 1
and/or 2.
Under normal circumstances the criteria required to MEET EXPECTATIONS in year 6 at the
rank of Assistant Professor should include evidence of all three of the following:
(1) An acceptable number of activities of types listed in Priority 1. An acceptable minimum
number of Priority 1 activities should lie between 2 and 3. Faculty with fewer than the minimum
Priority 1 activities should have a strong record of Priority 2 activities in order to meet
expectations.
(2) One or more publications in Priority 1 or 2 that present work initiated after appointment at
CSUSB. If this criterion is met with Priority 2 publication(s) it is expected that some of these
results will eventually be published in Priority 1 venues.
(3) Substantial involvement of students (undergraduate and/or graduate) in published research
(students as co-authors on abstracts and/or published papers).
Success in obtaining external funding to support a faculty member’s research is not required, but
it strongly reinforces the faculty member’s application, especially if it also supports student
research.
b. At the rank of Associate Professor
The MEETS EXPECTATIONS faculty member at the rank of Associate Professor must continue
to demonstrate a record of active involvement in, and successful accomplishment of, research or
scholarly activities in the biological sciences. Under normal circumstances the criteria to meet
expectations at the rank of Associate Professor should include evidence of both of the following:
(1) An acceptable number of publications or activities of types listed in Priority 1, based on work
initiated after appointment at CSUSB. An acceptable minimum of number of Priority 1
publications or activities, since promoted to the current rank, should lie between 2 and 4.
Faculty with fewer than the minimum Priority 1 publications or activities should have a strong
record of Priority 2 activities in order to meet expectations.

215

(2) Substantial involvement of students (undergraduate and/or graduate) in published research
(students as co-authors on abstracts and/or published papers).
Success in obtaining external funding to support a faculty member’s research is not required, but
it strongly reinforces the faculty member’s application, especially if it also supports student
research.
c. At the rank of Professor
The MEETS EXPECTATIONS faculty member at the rank of Professor must demonstrate a
continuing record of successful accomplishment and recognition in research or scholarly
activities in the field of biological sciences. Under normal circumstances it is expected that a
Full Professor will continue to publish Priority 1 papers at a reasonable rate and to maintain a
substantial involvement of students (undergraduate and/or graduate) in his or her published
research (students as co-authors on abstracts and/or published papers). Success in obtaining
external funding to support a faculty member’s research is not required, but it strongly reinforces
the faculty member’s research record, especially if it also supports student research.
Above Expectations
To be considered ABOVE EXPECTATIONS in the area of research or scholarly contributions in
the field of biological sciences the faculty member must, as a minimum, have met the
requirements set forth above for meets expectations appropriate to rank. In addition to this, the
faculty member must also have attained recognition beyond the University in research and/or
scholarly activity in the field of biological sciences that is clearly documented by, but not limited
to, such activities as: 1) publication of an invited article or book chapter in a publication that was
blind peer-reviewed and professionally edited and published by a nationally or internationally
recognized professional society or publishing house; 2) recognition in the form of an award or
honor bestowed on the faculty member for his or her research activity by a recognized biological
entity or agency; 3) invited/keynote presentations given by the faculty member on his or her
research at a nationally/internationally recognized meeting, or selection of the faculty member as
a distinguished speaker by a society or agency; 4) a request from a
regional/national/international external agency/entity for the faculty member to act as a expert
consultant within his or her field of expertise on a scientific project; 5) a publication record that
exceeds the criteria for meeting expectations at the faculty member’s current rank, thus
demonstrating the faculty member’s significant contribution to, and expertise in, his or her field
of biology, 6) a clearly demonstrated record of the faculty member’s ability to obtain significant
external funding to support his or her research and that of his or her students.
C. UNIVERSITY AND/OR COMMUNITY SERVICE
The Department of Biology follows the criteria for performance review of University and/or
Community Service set forth in the University document FAM 652.4 both in terms of what is
deemed to meet expectations and to be above expectations. Performance in this area includes
participation in departmental, college, university and CSU system-wide committee activities.
While the Department of Biology typically has committees, composed of a subset of the faculty
(e.g. Departmental Evaluation Committee, search committees, Chair Evaluation Committee,
etc.), the Department also values its commitment to shared governance. Functions such as

216

scheduling, graduate coordinator, and curriculum are “chaired” by an individual faculty member
but governed by the faculty as a whole. Thus, active participation by faculty at all levels is vital
to the effective function of the Department. Every faculty member should explain in the FAR
(and document where possible) the role he or she played in departmental matters that were
addressed by a committee of the whole (e.g., curricular issues, textbook adoption, self-study
report preparation, departmental assessment, etc.), as well as their role in specialized committees.
Service expectations also include advising of students (undergraduate and graduate). The
Department practices mandatory advising for all undergraduate students; students are not
assigned to specific advisors, but rather are free to seek out advice from faculty of their choice.
Hence, advising loads can vary considerably from person to person, and from semester to
semester. The Department also values other professional service activities both within and
outside of the university system. With reference to service activities in the community outside
the University, the Department expects that such service should clearly draw upon the faculty
member’s professional expertise. Examples of such service could include, but are not limited to,
undertaking proposal and manuscript reviews, serving on proposal review panels, appointment as
editor or assistant editor for a discipline-recognized journal or other publication series, service to
professional societies (e.g., meeting-planning committees, technical program committees,
development work, governance roles), giving talks on biology to local schools, community
colleges, universities, local professional societies and civic organizations, and interviews with
the media. While there is no formal evaluation of service activities, exemplary work (e.g., being
elected as committee chair, or serving on a committee that is exceptionally demanding, or being
elected to a position in a national biological organization) is given special consideration by the
DEC and Chair. Examples of any exemplary work especially, need to be fully explained and
documented.
MEETS EXPECTATIONS AND ABOVE EXPECTATIONS IN THE AREA OF
UNIVERSITY AND/OR COMMUNITY SERVICE
Meets Expectations
a. At the rank of Assistant Professor
The MEETS EXPECTATIONS faculty member should demonstrate a developing level of
participation particularly at the departmental level within the area of service. For the purpose of
awarding tenure, the MEETS EXPECTATIONS faculty member must demonstrate significant
participation in the area of service. The faculty member should describe in his or her FAR the
workload of the committees on which he or she has served and/or particular contributions to
service activities conducted jointly with others. Where assigned time was given for service
work, this should be noted in the FAR.
b. At the rank of Associate Professor
The MEETS EXPECTATIONS faculty member at this rank must demonstrate significant
participation in the area of service at the departmental and College level, as well as service at
University or System level and off campus where appropriate. The faculty member should
describe in his or her FAR the workload of the committees on which he or she has served and/or
particular contributions to service activities conducted jointly with others. Where assigned time
was given for service work, this should be noted in the FAR. For a faculty member hired at this

217

rank, a MEETS EXPECTATIONS rating may be assigned for demonstrating sufficient progress
towards achieving this standard by the third probationary year.
c. At the rank of Professor
In addition to significant participation in service activities, the MEETS EXPECTATIONS
faculty member is expected to provide effective leadership in some of these activities, especially
at the departmental, College, and University or system level, as well as service off campus where
appropriate. The faculty member should describe in his or her FAR the workload of the
committees on which he or she has served and/or particular contributions to service activities
conducted jointly with others. Where assigned time was given for service work, this should be
noted in the FAR.
Above Expectations
A rating of ABOVE EXPECTATIONS in this area is awarded for exceptional service that has
been clearly documented as to quantity and quality.
To be considered ABOVE EXPECTATIONS in the area of service, the faculty member must
meet the qualifications set forth above for MEETS EXPECTATIONS appropriate to academic
rank. In addition, the faculty member must demonstrate unusual effectiveness or performance as
a contributor or leader in the University, the off-campus community, or a combination of both.

FAM 651.581
HISTORY DEPARTMENT GUIDELINES FOR THE EVALUATION OF
PROBATIONARY AND TENURE TRACK FACULTY
Preamble
This document is designed to provide clarification and direction in the evaluation of
teaching, research, scholarly or creative contributions, and service in relation to files
submitted by faculty in the Department of History. It should be read as a supplement to the
university guidelines published in the FAM.
Faculty in the department utilize a wide variety of methodologies and pedagogies requiring a
flexible document that provides guidance but does not hinder academic freedom. The focus
of this document is to clarify ways in which faculty members may assist evaluators in
understanding the significance of their individual contributions in the three areas of
evaluation.
Narrative Introduction

218

In their retention, promotion, and tenure (RPT) documents, faculty members are strongly
encouraged to write a narrative summary introduction to the file that explains their teaching
philosophy, plan for research, scholarly and creative activities, and approach to service. This
section should be less than 1,500 words. It should provide guidance to evaluators in
understanding the faculty members’ choices in terms of how they organize their approach to
each area, any particular items that the faculty members would like to highlight, and/or
specific approaches that may not be readily apparent through a simple listing of activities and
attachments. It can also explain any overarching plan or philosophical approach that ties
together two or more areas of evaluation, as advised by the American Historical Association
(AHA), the Organization of American Historians (OAH), and the National Council on Public
History (NCPH) in their white paper on the publicly engaged historian. In
the narrative, the
faculty member may also mention any extenuating circumstances, such as natural disasters,
leaves, budget restrictions, that affected teaching, research and scholarly, and service
activities. This narrative introduction can help explain choices in terms of pedagogy, teaching
philosophy, specific decisions regarding research, scholarly and/or creative activities, and
service that may clarify connections between the areas, assist evaluators in determining impact
and significance of activities, and explain faculty choices regarding distribution of time and
effort.

Areas of Evaluation
I. Teaching
The department accepts the following four areas of evaluation as described in the FAM as
the basic criteria for teaching: 1) Command of Subject Matter; 2) Course
Design/Preparation, Instructional Material and Organization; 3) Effectiveness in
Instruction; 4) Academic Assessment of Students.
The department accepts the application of criteria and rating system for teaching as described
in the FAM, and it adds the following clarification for faculty to be considered “Above
Expectations” in the area of teaching. The FAM lists the two considerations for “Above
Expectations”: “A preponderance of evidence demonstrating excellence in teaching as
indicated in classroom visitation reports, SOTEs (or alternative student evaluation
instruments), the Faculty Activities Report, or additional appropriate documentation related
to teaching”; and “A record of distinction for some aspect of teaching at or beyond the
University.”
A Department of History faculty member may also demonstrate “Above Expectations” in the
area of teaching with extraordinary activities that demonstrate significant curricula and
instructional effort that goes above the norm such as participation in one or more of the
following: study abroad experiences, field trip opportunities, engaging students in research
that goes beyond the scope of the classroom, engaging students in systematic and sustainable

219

service-learning activities, innovations in teaching, especially those that are developed over
time and that are sustainable, substantial supervision of internships, independent studies,
honors theses, and graduate student theses. This list is not exhaustive or exclusive. It is
meant only to demonstrate possibilities not already listed in the FAM, and the onus should
be on faculty member to explain how and why these activities reflect extraordinary efforts,
with a specific focus on the ways that these experiences contribute to students’ learning
outside of the traditional classroom setting
The current maximum teaching load expectation for full-time faculty is 4/4 (24 WTU total),
or the equivalent. A large lecture class of 120 or more students, without the assistance of an
instructional assistant or teaching assistant, is currently equivalent to two courses
(6WTU). Teaching less than the 4/4 expectation is acceptable due to negotiated or granted
course releases, fellowships, administrative or research course releases, other approved
academic activities, medical/family leave, sabbaticals, or difference in pay leaves.
II. Research, Scholarly or Creative Contributions
The Department of History accepts the general guidelines for evaluating the research and
scholarly or creative contributions as outlined in the FAM. In evaluating a faculty member’s
professional record, the department emphasizes the quality and significance of the faculty
member’s professional contributions rather than a set number of particular activities. We also
value the faculty member’s continuing engagement in an active scholarly and/or creative
program. We do, however, recognize the need for transparency and clarity. Therefore the
following is an attempt to outline both the quantitative and qualitative expectations for
faculty at various levels.
Evaluation committees and others involved in performance review recognize that no single
method exists whereby faculty may demonstrate research, scholarly or creative contributions.
Regardless of its diversity, however, scholarship should be intellectually rigorous, extending
the frontiers of knowledge, and can be documented and validated, and conveyed to other
professionals. As the field of history is diverse and the work of some faculty members in the
Department of History is not confined to traditionally recognized publications, evaluators
should consider all activities of faculty members in their evaluation. Nonetheless, “it shall be
the sole responsibility of the faculty member to provide documented evidence of research,
scholarly or creative contributions referenced in the FAR.” Faculty members are also
encouraged to consult with the department Chair, as suggested in the FAM, to “ascertain that
the FAR contains a thorough description of the faculty member’s professional activities and
reflects a true picture of research, scholarly or creative contributions.”
The department also accepts the range of research, scholarly or creative contributions listed in
the FAM, reorganized and annotated in relation to the relative value the Department of
History places on these contributions. The relative weight and ranked values discussed below
is not absolute. It is meant for the purposes of explaining values generally shared by
historians, but each individual faculty file should be evaluated on its own merits based on the
evidence provided by the faculty member.

220

Guidelines for Evaluating Scholarly Activities
With the expectation of assigned time for research during the faculty member’s first years
of appointment, for tenure and promotion to Associate Professor, a faculty member who
has produced a significant contribution to historical knowledge especially through a
scholarly, peer-reviewed monograph, or the equivalent in the time since their hire-date will
be deemed “Above Expectations.” The department places particular emphasis on the peerreview process and follows in line with the American Historical Association’s statement,
which notes, in part that “peer review means that a manuscript of research proposal will be
read and evaluated by other scholars with expertise in the time period, subject matter,
languages, and documents with which the author deals. As peers of the author in a
specialized field, these reviews provide analysis to the review boards of agencies on the
scholarly significance of the article [or manuscript]. . . [and is a process that reflects that]
fair and orderly publication required a system in which experts could provide objective
evaluations before publication.” Faculty are strongly encouraged to document that process
as a part of their Faculty Activities Report. A peer-reviewed monograph published with an
academic press is roughly equivalent to four to six (4-6) peer-reviewed journal articles,
depending on the length, quality of work, and significance. In order to receive “Meet
Expectations” faculty must “ demonstrate a record of active involvement in and successful
accomplishment of research, scholarly or creative activities.” The production of two to
three (2-3) scholarly peer-reviewed, journal articles, or equivalent in the time since their
hire-date or last promotion will normally be considered “Meets Expectations.” If a faculty
member does not produce a scholarly monograph or its equivalent and does not produce a
minimum of two journal articles or their equivalent, since their hire-date or last promotion,
it is likely that the faculty’s scholarly production will be rated as “Below Expectations.”
For promotion to Professor, with the understanding that teaching load may increase due to
less assigned time for research, a faculty member is expected to provide evidence of
contribution to historical scholarship beyond the material submitted for appointment to
Associate Professor. As per the FAM, to receive “Meets Expectations” at the rank of
Professor, a faculty member “must demonstrate a record of successful accomplishment and
recognition in research, scholarly or creative activities.” This should include the publication
of peer-reviewed work (or peer-reviewed work accepted for publication, with documentation
of acceptance) and should normally consist of two or more articles or a monograph and the
participation in other professional activities outlined below that demonstrate the faculty
member’s engagement in their discipline and contributions to disciplinary and/or other public
venues. In this, as in other places, the writer of the FAR is encouraged to provide evidence of
merit of publications and explicitly document the review process.
Furthermore, “to receive Above Expectations, the evaluated faculty must, as a minimum, have
met the requirement set forth above for Meets Expectations appropriate to rank. In addition,
they must have attained recognition beyond the University in research, scholarly activity,
and/or creative activity.” Evidence of such achievement and activity should include peerreviewed published work (or peer-reviewed work accepted for publication, with

221

documentation of acceptance) such as a monograph or equivalent research articles, as well as
other professional activities, such as those described below, that demonstrate the faculty
member’s engagement in their
discipline and contributions to disciplinary and/or other
public venues, and that has helped them establish a national and/or international reputation in
their field.
The department recognizes the diverse ways that members engage in scholarly activity. The
following list provided based on the FAM is annotated and reorganized in hierarchical
order to reflect the relative weight historians give to each activity:
As stated in the FAM, “Publications, such as books or texts (whole or part thereof),
journal, periodical, or any other type of academically specialized form.
Professionally recognized or refereed publications are generally more significant.”
Historians generally value a scholarly monograph, i.e. a specialist book on a single
subject usually written by a single author published by an academic press that uses a
peer-review process, as the pinnacle academic achievement in history. The nature of
historical research, which often involves research questions that cannot be adequately
answered in the scope of a single article, lends itself to the length of a typical
academic monograph. As the AHA points out, in addition to the years that historians
spend researching and writing their dissertation, “it is not unusual for an early-career
historian to spend five or six years revising a dissertation and preparing the
manuscript for submission to a press for consideration.” They recognize that “history
has been and remains a book-based discipline.”
[1]

The Department of History also shares the value that other scholars place on the
publication of refereed journal articles as a standard for evaluating scholarly
contributions in the field. Historians generally weigh the peer-reviewed monograph
published with an academic press as the equivalent of four to six (4-6) peerreviewed journal articles depending on the length, quality of work, and
significance of the contribution. Moreover, in some fields in history, creative
endeavors such as exhibits, digital collections, textbooks, archeological projects,
other field projects, translations, oral history collections, etc. are also valued. These
projects often can involve a peer-review process as well. Thus, the Department of
History recognizes and asks that college and university evaluators appreciate that
there are a variety of ways in which peer-review is established.
The Committee shall consider the extent to which the faculty member’s scholarship
and creative endeavors have substantial, demonstrable impact on the faculty member’s
field(s) of specialization and the degree to which the candidate’s scholarly works
represent new contributions as opposed to being restatements of prior works. It is the
responsibility of the faculty member to assist all evaluators in determining the quality
and significance of their research outputs.
While some historical fields may have accepted impact factors or rankings of
journals, not all historical fields abide by these rankings, so it is up to the faculty
member to provide evidence of the peer review process and document the weight
222

and impact of the journal or outlet in which they are publishing to the field they are
a part of. Because of the rapidly changing nature of publishing technology,
publications need not always be in print, but should be original and/or innovative.
Publications can also be disseminated digitally in the form of a digital book, an
online journal, a mixed media website, etc. The same preference is given to
publications that are professionally recognized, refereed through the peer review
process, and/or evaluated for quality as indicated by the award of a peer-reviewed
external grant of international, national, or regional significance (e.g., National
Endowment for the Humanities - NEH) and/or an objective scholarly external
review.
1) “Creative activity”
Creative may include activities culminating in a public display or exhibition such as a
digital display or exhibition, an archival collection (digital or other), archaeological
excavation, oral history collection, historic preservation projects, and community
engagement activities. Depending on the scope, location, and foci of these activities,
they can sometimes be very time consuming. Faculty are therefore encouraged to
explain the time and effort involved in such activity. Evaluators may be aided in their
assessment of creative activities if faculty members seek objective peer evaluations of
the work, including an assessment of significance, effort, and quality of the creative
activity. The Working Group on Evaluating Public History Scholarship, composed of
the American Historical Association (AHA), National Council on Public History
(NCPH), and Organization of American Historians (OAH) have published a Report
which describes that some of these creative activities take place through teaching. The
instructor often serves as project director as well as leading their course(s)—framing
the project’s questions, establishing community connections, shaping research
methods, identifying sources, evaluating conclusions, shaping the design and form of
the final product, and guiding its dissemination. A community-based class project
should be thought of as a work of scholarship for the instructor as much as for
participating students, as well as a significant additional teaching commitment.
Through collaborative public work, the instructor has indeed contributed to the
“advancement, integration, application, and transformation of knowledge.”
2) “Editing, reviewing, indexing, abstracting, or performing other editorial
work for professional or scholarly publications.”
The significance of activity depends on the scope of the work, and the relative
contribution to the field. Some traditional indicators may help establish
significance. When multiple editors are involved, a Joint Activities Report will
aid in establishing relative effort. Other criteria may aid in a qualitative analysis
of the activity such as impact factor. Objective outside letters of review, and/or
more traditional published reviews of the work may also be helpful to the
evaluation committees.
3) “Receipt of a fellowship, grant, contract, award, prize, or other
indication of professional recognition.”

223

Grants are evaluated relative to the scope of work involved in preparing the grant, and
whether the grant is international, national, regional, local, or internal to the university
in determining the weight given in evaluating a faculty member’s file. While grant,
fellowship, contract, award, and prize opportunities are limited in the historical field,
national grants are the most significant. National grants through organizations such as
the National Endowment for the Humanities - NEH, for example, require several
levels of peer review. Such grants are extraordinarily time consuming in terms of
preparation of the grant application alone, and have a very low award rate of anywhere
from 10-20%. Grants such as these are given much more weight than internal grants,
or grants with very high acceptance rates, and with less rigorous standards of review.
Regional grants are typically given a medium weight. They may also require extensive
work in preparation of the application itself and may also have very low award rates,
but involve only regional competition or recognition. Local and internal CSU grants
are given the least amount of weight because they typically do not take a lot of time to
prepare and because they have a higher reward rate.
4) Presentations at professional meetings dealing with research, investigative
activity, or creative activity.
This includes active participation in seminars, conferences, meetings, or other
activity leading to research, scholarly or creative contributions. One of the stipulations
for meeting expectations at all levels of review is demonstrated continued activity
within the faculty member’s field of expertise. Presenting work at professional
meetings, or venues where ongoing research can receive comment from peers or that
can make a contribution is an important way to demonstrate continued active
engagement in one’s specific field of work. Faculty members should explain the
weight and significance of the conference to their field, if deemed necessary, and
include, if possible, a draft of their presentation in their FAR.
5) Non-Refereed Publications such as Book Reviews, Encyclopedia Entries,
Textbook Entries, Reports, Editorials, Blogs, Non-Scholarly, or Non-Research
Articles etc.
6) Consultancies, whether paid or unpaid, of a professional nature.
The Department of History includes courses and degrees in applied areas of the
discipline, including archives, museums, oral history, and historic preservation. These
activities often involve partnerships, outside agencies, and contract work with
agencies. To teach in this field, faculty members need to remain currently active
within their fields and therefore must continue partnering with and/or consulting with
outside groups or agencies. This work may be paid or unpaid. Due to the relevant
nature of this activity to a faculty member’s continued professionalization, this
activity may be weighted in terms of impact, innovation, association with another area
of evaluation such as grants or completed creative works . Faculty members may
assist evaluation committees in their analysis of the qualitative nature of activities
listed under this subcategory by providing a letter articulating
the significance
and/or scope of the faculty member’s consultation activities.

224

7) Active leadership and/or service in recognized professional societies. (This
activity may also be relevant to University Service.) The faculty member is
expected to explain and present evidence of the effort involved in their duties
related to these endeavors.
8) Continuing education, retraining, and the development of new skills
relevant to one's current or potential assignment. Evidence of these activities may
include taking of courses, earning advanced degrees or certifications, or
participating in professional conferences, seminars, workshops, institutes, or
special programs which lead to systematic updating of knowledge.
9) Any other items of specific professional activity, such as work in progress,
research related to instruction, research on how students learn and apply
knowledge over an extended period of time, etc.
a) Work in progress: Faculty members can greatly assist evaluation committees
in this area by providing documentation of the progress toward completion of various
works in progress. In traditional areas of work, this would include initial submissions
for publication, readers’ reports, contracts, revised drafts of manuscripts, page proofs,
galley sheets, etc. A qualitative analysis of the significance and contribution may
include the scope of the project, the likelihood of, and timeline for, completion, and
the projected outlet for dissemination (e.g., is it peer reviewed, funded through a peerreviewed competitive grant, and/or does it promise to have a high impact value?)
b) Research related to instruction and student learning may have originated in
the area of teaching, but sustained research that results in a completed work that is
shared beyond the university is given more weight as a professional activity and
should be counted as a research, scholarly activity. Despite listing this as the last
item annotated, the significance, scope, and relative weight of these types of
activities can be evaluated along the guidelines already listed.
According to the FAM, a faculty member can be considered as having achieved
“above expectations” in the area of research and scholarship if they “have attained
recognition beyond the University in research, scholarly activity and/or creative
activity.” For the history department, this includes, but is not limited to, reviews of
one’s work published in major journals, invitations to participate in activities
outside of the university as a content specialist, awards for published materials,
initiations to speak at regional, national, or international conferences, serving as a
peer-reviewer for a press, a journal, or grant agency (e.g., NEH), or other activities
that reflect recognized expertise. A faculty member who believes that their
professional activities are “above expectations” is encouraged to show evidence of
such recognition. They may also request an external review of professional
activities materials, as set out in the FAM, to help determine the significance of
their work.
III. Service

225

The Department of History places a high value on both University and Community service. The
department follows the criteria for performance review of University and/or Community Service
set forth in the university document FAM 300 both in terms of what is deemed to meet
expectations and to be above expectations. Performance in this area can include participation in
departmental, college, university, CSU system-wide committee activities, and the community.
The department promotes general departmental citizenship, as well as engaged and
substantial service to the department and some service to at least one of these levels:
college, university, CSU system, and/or community. Service to the faculty member’s
profession can be included as an additional level under Service, or it can be included under
Research, Scholarly or Creative Contributions. The department values the unique ways in
which faculty are positioned to serve various communities - communities that are at times
local, national, and/or international in scope. With reference to service activities in the
community outside the university, the department expects that such service should clearly
draw upon the faculty member’s professional expertise and be connected to the historical
field. Examples of such service could include, but are not limited to, in order of
significance: service to professional societies, stewarding donors or obtaining grants for the
university, presenting at other universities, community colleges, local professional societies
and civic organizations, interviews with the media, adjudicating competitions or giving
talks on history at local schools. We recognize that the forms of service may vary depending
on a faculty member’s strengths and opportunities, as well as on particular service needs in
the department, the particular field, and/or other areas.
Service expectations vary depending on the year and rank of the faculty member. As a guiding
principle, the service expectations will increase as faculty members advance in years and
rank. For first year Assistant Professors, service is expected at the departmental level. This is
sufficient for retention at the 2nd year Performance Reviews. Generally, first year Assistant
Professors are expected to serve on two departmental committees (or service roles). For
Assistant Professors in their second year, they are expected to serve on the equivalent of three
departmental committees (or service roles), and begin serving on College/University
committees. Suggested department committees and service roles for Assistant Professors
include, but are not limited to, Curriculum Committee, Part-Time Committee, Scholarship
Committee, Advisor for the History Club (Phi Alpha Theta), and Website/Marketing
Coordinator.
For Associate and full Professors, they are expected to serve on department committees or
hold service roles, and are also expected to serve on college, university, and community/offcampus committees. Suggested departmental committee or service roles for Associate and
full Professors include, but are not limited to, Graduate Coordinator, Assessment
Coordinator, RPT Committee, Hiring Committee (Chair/Member), Scheduling Committee
(Chair/Member), Curriculum Committee (Chair/Member), Part-Time Committee
(Chair/Member), etc. For guidance beyond CSUSB, activities that meet expectations include
notable and recognizable community service, engagement with professional organizations,
or other labor-intensive assignment(s) that may include scholarly and/or creative
contributions that should be outlined in a faculty member’s FAR.

226

The Department of History sometimes conducts department business as a committee of the
whole, yet also has several committees that vary in time commitment. Thus, time commitment
plays a critical role in how service is evaluated, in that some committee work on the levels of
department, college, and university require significantly more dedicated time and effort than
others, and are in turn given more weight than those that do not. A faculty member should
explain in the FAR (and document where possible) the role played and time commitment they
dedicated in each committee, especially in those department matters that were addressed by a
committee of the whole (e.g., hiring committees, self-study report preparation, departmental
assessment, etc.). The faculty member should describe in their FAR the workload of the
committees on which they have served and/or particular contributions to service activities
conducted jointly with others.
Service expectations also include advising of students (undergraduate and graduate). The
department practices mandatory advising for all undergraduate students. The department
Chair assigns an approximately equal number of student advisees to each faculty member.
While there is no formal evaluation of service activities, exemplary work (e.g., being elected
as committee chair, or serving on a committee that is exceptionally demanding, or being
elected to a position in a national organization, or exceeding one’s service expectations based
on their year/rank) is given special consideration by the department and Chair. Examples of
any exemplary work especially, need to be fully explained and documented.

FAM 652.1
EVALUATION OF TENURE-LINE FACULTY
FAM 652.1 Evaluation of Tenure Line Faculty
Purpose and Scope
The purpose of faculty evaluation is to develop and maintain high quality faculty who are
intellectually and professionally active in teaching; research, scholarly and creative
contributions; and service to the university and community.
Peer judgment is vital to any evaluation process in academia. Peer evaluation occurs at all
levels of faculty evaluation: Department, College, and University.
Evaluation also includes administrative review.
Procedures contained in this document are in accordance with the Collective Bargaining
Agreement (CBA). If an inconsistency is found between this policy and the CBA that is in effect,
the CBA shall prevail.

227

There are several policies in the FAM governing the evaluation of different categories of faculty
as defined in the CBA: instructional faculty; student service professionals, academic related;
library faculty; and coaching faculty. This policy focuses on the evaluation of tenure-line
(defined below) instructional faculty. But some of the stipulations in this policy may apply to
other types of faculty. The procedures on student evaluation and classroom visitation, for
example, are applicable to the evaluation of lecturers as well.
Definition
1. Tenure-line Faculty: Those faculty who are either probationary or tenured.
2. Lecturer: Non-tenure-line instructional faculty.
3. Department: Department or school (e.g. School of Computer Science and Engineering,
School of Social Work).
4. Department chair: Department chair or school director.
5. FAD Office: Office of Faculty Affairs and Development.
6. Service to university and/or community: To replace university and/or community service
that has been used in previous versions of this and other evaluation policies.
Policy Statement
1. There are two types of evaluation of tenure-line faculty. First is performance review,
applicable to all faculty for purposes of determining retention, tenure, and/or
promotion. The second type of evaluation is periodic evaluation, applicable to faculty
not subject to performance review.
2. Only tenured faculty and academic administrators may engage in the evaluation of
tenure-line faculty. Evaluation criteria and procedures shall be available to faculty
before the evaluation process begins. No changes in such criteria or procedures may be
made during the evaluation process.
3. At all levels of evaluation, before recommendations are forwarded to the next level,
faculty evaluated shall be given a copy of each recommendation stating in writing the
reasons for the recommendation. Faculty have the right to respond or rebut within ten
days following receipt of the recommendation. A copy of the response or rebuttal
statement shall be placed in the Working Personnel Action File (WPAF) and be sent to
previous evaluators. The faculty evaluated may request an opportunity to discuss the
recommendation with the recommending party. This discussion shall not alter the
evaluation timeline of evaluation.
4. Recommendations or decisions relating to retention, tenure, promotion, termination, or
any other personnel action shall be based primarily on material contained in the WPAF.
If a personnel recommendation or decision is based on reasons not contained in the
WPAF, the party making the recommendation or decision shall commit those reasons to

228

writing in a signed statement, to be placed in the WPAF and provided to the faculty. In
cases of promotion, evaluation committee members must have a higher rank than those
being considered for promotion.
5. Recommendations shall be confidential.
6. Timetables for evaluation are prepared at the beginning of each academic year by the
FAD Office and approved by the Faculty Senate.
Overview of Evaluation
1. Evaluation committees
a. Department evaluation committees
i. Composition: A Department Evaluation Committee shall normally be
composed of three tenured faculty. In departments with many evaluations
to conduct, the department may vote to increase the size of the DEC to as
many as five members. One member may be an Associate Professor who is
not undergoing performance review, and the remaining members must be
Professors. Associate Professors must recuse themselves from cases
involving promotion to Professor (see CBA Article 15.43). If a recusal results
in a committee with fewer than three members, the department shall elect a
Professor to serve as an alternate committee member. Eligible faculty who
are undergoing periodic evaluation may serve on the committee but must
recuse themselves from their own evaluation. The Department Chair may not
serve on this committee. The committee shall elect its chair who must hold
the rank of Professor. The committee serves a one-year term, elected
annually from within the department or from related academic disciplines.
Members of the Department Evaluation Committee cannot serve
concurrently on the College Evaluation Committee or the University
Evaluation Committee but may serve concurrently on other Department
Evaluation Committees.
Faculty in the Faculty Early Retirement Program are eligible to serve on the
Departmental Evaluation Committee if (a) the period of active employment
spans the period of the Committee’s work, and (b) the appointment is
approved by the College Dean. However, evaluation committees may not be
comprised solely of faculty participating in the Faculty Early Retirement
Program.
The election of the committee must be conducted in accordance with the
procedures stipulated in FAM 652.6: Election of the Department Evaluation
Committee.

229

ii. Functions: This committee shall conduct both performance review and
periodic evaluation of the department tenure-line faculty. It may also
evaluate lecturers if the department so decides (FAM 652.2: Evaluation of
Lecturers). It is highly recommended that committee members attend
training provided by FAD prior to the review and discussion of files.
b. College evaluation committees
i. Composition: A College Evaluation Committee shall be composed of four
tenured faculty. At least three of the four shall hold the rank of Professor;
the fourth may be an Associate Professor who is not being evaluated for
promotion. The committee shall elect its chair who must hold the rank of
Professor. Department Chairs or Associate Deans may not serve on this
committee. Members shall be elected to staggered two-year terms by the
tenure-line faculty of the college. No more than one member may come from
a single department, unless the college has fewer than four departments, in
which case, no more than two members may come from a single
department. A member of a College Evaluation Committee cannot serve
concurrently as a member of a Department Evaluation Committee or the
University Evaluation Committee.
Faculty in the Faculty Early Retirement Program are eligible to serve on the
College Evaluation Committee if (a) the period of active employment spans
the period of the Committee’s work, and (b) the appointment is approved by
the College Dean. However, evaluation committees may not be comprised
solely of faculty participating in the Faculty Early Retirement Program.
Functions: This committee shall conduct college-level performance review of
faculty in the college. It is highly recommended that committee members attend
training provided by FAD prior to the review and discussion of files.
c. University evaluation committee
i. Composition: The University Evaluation Committee shall be composed of one
tenured Professor elected from each College by the tenure-line faculty of the
College, one tenured librarian elected by the tenure-line librarians, and one
tenured SSPAR elected by the tenure-line SSPARs. Department Chairs or
Associate/Assistant Deans may not serve on this committee. Library
Evaluators may serve on this committee but must withdraw when a librarian
they have evaluated is being evaluated. Members shall serve two-year
staggered terms. The Committee shall elect its Chair. Members of this
committee cannot serve concurrently on any evaluation committee at a
lower level.

230

Faculty in the Faculty Early Retirement Program are eligible to serve on the
University Evaluation Committee if (a) the period of active employment
spans the period of the Committee’s work, and (b) the appointment is
approved by the Provost and Vice President of Academic Affairs. However,
evaluation committees may not be comprised solely of faculty participating
in the Faculty Early Retirement Program.
Functions: This committee shall conduct performance reviews of faculty at
the University level in cases where recommendations from the Department
Evaluation Committee, Department Chair, College Evaluation Committee,
and Dean are not unanimous as well as in cases involving non-retention,
denial of tenure, or denial of promotion. This committee shall also serve as
the higher-level peer review committee for librarians and SSPARs. Its ratings
shall be based primarily on previous recommendations and ratings. It is
highly recommended that committee members attend training provided by
FAD prior to the review and discussion of files.
2. Instruments of evaluation
a. Faculty Activities Reports (FARs): FARs shall be submitted by all evaluated faculty.
FARs shall cover all three areas of evaluation: teaching; research, scholarly or creative
contributions; and service to university and/or community. A FAR should cover the
following periods of time:
I. For all probationary faculty being considered for retention or tenure: cumulative
since appointment.
ii. For faculty applying for promotion: cumulative since the submission date of
the FAR that led to the previous promotion or since initial appointment,
whichever is more recent.
iii. For all others (e.g., tenured faculty subject to periodic evaluation):
cumulative since the submission of the most recent FAR.
b. Supporting Documentation: The evaluated faculty will provide a brief narrative
explaining the significance of his or her work and contributions in each area of the
FAR: teaching; research, scholarly, and creative activities; and service. Supporting
documentation for activities must be attached (for example, course descriptions,
reprints of publications, appropriate evidence regarding speeches, consultations,
performances, exhibitions, and work in progress, as exemplified below:
i. For probationary faculty being considered for retention: all supporting
documentation since the last performance review.

231

ii. For probationary faculty being considered for tenure and/or promotion: all
supporting documentation since appointment.
iii. For tenured faculty applying for promotion: all supporting documentation
since the last promotion or since initial appointment, whichever is more
recent.
iv. For all others (e.g., tenured faculty subject to periodic evaluation): all
supporting documentation since the last FAR was submitted.
v. For probationary faculty with accomplishments achieved before joining
CSUSB and granted service credit for these accomplishments, the
documentation for these accomplishments shall be included. They will be
given equal weight during evaluation as those achieved at CSUSB but, viewed
as a whole, shall not be the majority of evidence for the granting of tenure or
promotion to the rank of Associate Professor.
vi. For probationary faculty with accomplishments achieved before joining
CSUSB but not granted service credit for these accomplishments, they may
opt to document these accomplishments. If documented, these accomplishments
shall be considered. Evaluators shall decide how much weight—if any—these
accomplishments should be given in their recommendations.
All FARs must be accompanied by an Index of Attachments.
In the case of collaborative research, scholarly or creative contributions, activities
or accomplishments, a Joint Activities Report must be submitted.
c. Classroom visitation reports: Classroom visitations shall be conducted for all
probationary faculty, tenured faculty requesting consideration for promotion, and
lecturers. Classroom visitations may also be scheduled when requested by
tenured faculty. The following guidelines must be met:
i. Classroom visitations shall be conducted at least once each academic
year during the probationary period. Visitations should be scheduled in as
many different courses and by as great a variety of visitors as possible.
Additional visitations may also be scheduled at the request of a faculty
member, the Department Evaluation Committee and the Department
Chair jointly, or the College Evaluation Committee and the College Dean
jointly.
ii. For tenure-line faculty, visitors and the course to be visited shall be
selected jointly by the College Evaluation Committee and the College
Dean, in consultation with the Department Chair, no later than the third
week of classes. The Department Chair shall in turn consult with the
faculty member to be visited for concurrence before the formal
assignment of visitors. For lecturers, visitors and the course to be visited
shall be selected jointly by the Department Evaluation committee or the

232

Department Lecturer Evaluation Committee (See FAM 652.2: Evaluation
of Lecturers) and the Department Chair.
All faculty members shall be informed in writing of planned visits.
Notification shall take place no less than three days before the visitors
have been notified of their assignments. All classroom visitation
assignment notifications, for both visitors and visitees, should be
completed by the end of the fifth week of the semester.
iii. Visitations for faculty in their first two probationary years shall be
conducted by two tenured faculty of equal or higher rank and from
disciplines as close as possible to that of the visited faculty. The two
visitors are expected to visit the same course on the same date.

Visitations for all other tenure-line faculty shall be conducted by one
tenured faculty of equal or higher rank and from a discipline as close as
possible to that of the visitee. An additional visitor may be requested by
the facultymember to be visited.
Visitations for lecturers are conducted by one faculty of the same or
higher rank. The date of the visitation shall be agreed upon by the visitor
and the visitee.
iv. Classroom visitation forms will be sent by the College Dean's office to
thE visitor and the visitee prior to the pre-visitation conference. The previsitation conference shall concern matters such as the course objectives,
content and organization, approaches and methods used, and the
relevance of the class to the overall course plan. The visitor shall arrange
all meetings.
The visitee shall furnish copies of syllabi, exams, and other materials to
the visitor. Throughout the process, the visitee’s intellectual property
rights shall always be respected and upheld by the visitor.
For online or hybrid courses, the materials made available to the visitor
for evaluation shall be comparable to what is provided for a visitation in a
face- to-face class. In an online class that is delivered synchronously, the
visitor shall have electronic access to one class session, the syllabus and
exams, plus any other supporting material the visitee deems useful to
provide a full picture of their methods of instruction. In an online class that
is delivered asynchronously, the visitor shall have access to online
materials that cover the equivalent of one day of class, plus the syllabus
and exams and other supporting materials as described above.
Student privacy must be respected. Visitors should not have access to
students’ grades or graded work. The length of time that visitors have

233

electronic access to discussion boards, chat room logs, etc. should be
limited in scope, and students should be informed about the time frame
during which the visitor will have that access.
For a hybrid course, the visitor and the visitee should determine the most
appropriate venue (i.e., online or in class) for the visitation.
v. No later than two weeks after the visitation, the visitor shall present the
Classroom Visitation Report to the visitee. A post-visitation conference
shall take place about the report and suggestions for improvement.
vi. The visitor and the visitee sign the Classroom Visitation Report which,
together with supporting materials, shall be transmitted by the Dean's
office. to the FAD Office for inclusion in the PAF. The faculty visited shall
be given a copy of the report by the visitor.
For lecturers, the classroom visitation report remains in the College office
for inclusion in the PAF.
All classroom visitation reports must be turned in to the college office by
the due date for student grades.
vii. The faculty visited may submit to the College office a written response
or rebuttal to be attached to the report, seven days following the postvisitation conference.
b. Student evaluation and alternative Evaluation Instruments
Student evaluations shall be required for all classes except for:
i. Classes with enrollments of fewer than five (5) students;
ii. Field experiences, thesis research, distance learning through
interactive
televised video, independent project/study, recitations, and internships;
and
iii. Team-taught classes.
Faculty teaching classes in which student evaluations are not
administered are encouraged to use alternative evaluation instruments.
The following guidelines should be met for all student evaluations.
i. Faculty Senate authorized forms shall be used.
ii. The faculty teaching the course shall not be present when the student

234

evaluation is conducted.
iii. As soon as practicable after the end of the term, faculty shall receive a
summary of results as well as the original paper forms. Probationary
facultyshould retain the original forms at least until the next performance
review. Faculty at the rank of Professor should retain them until their next
periodic evaluation. Lecturers should retain the original forms at least until
their next periodic evaluation.
iv. All student evaluations will be stored in electronic format. The following
provisions shall govern the inclusion of student evaluations in the PAF:
Probationary Faculty: The student evaluations of classes taught by a
probationary faculty in the first term of employment are automatically
excluded from the PAF. However, he or she may choose to include them
via a written request submitted to the FAD Office. The student evaluations
of all other classes shall enter the PAF.
Tenured Faculty: Tenured Assistant and Associate Professors may
exclude up to twenty percent (20%) of the student evaluations per
academic year. Those excluded, however, cannot be from classes that
have been visited. Tenured Professors may exclude up to thirty percent
(30%) of the courses evaluated per academic year.
In cases in which student evaluation exclusion occurs, classes whose
student evaluations are included shall be representative of the faculty’s
teaching assignment as jointly determined by the faculty concerned and
his/her department chair. Should there be disagreement, each party shall
select 50% of the courses to be included in the PAF. If this selection
process results in student evaluations not being included in the PAF, the
parties shall submit a signed statement, specifying those student
evaluations which are excluded.
At the time of submitting the FAR, faculty evaluated shall provide the FAD
Office a statement about student evaluation inclusion/exclusion. This
statement shall not be included in the PAF.
Alternative Student Evaluation Instruments. Based on college or
departmental guidelines, additional evaluation instruments such as
Student Evaluations of Supervision Effectiveness (SESEs) may be used
as supplements or alternatives to student evaluations.
3. Files for evaluation
a. The Personnel Action File (PAF)

235

i. A PAF shall be maintained for each faculty member in the FAD Office
except the PAFs for tenured professors, which are kept at the college
office.
ii. Faculty shall have the right to submit additional materials and written
rebuttals to any material in the PAF. The sources of these documents
must be identified. Identification shall indicate the author, the committee,
the office, or the name of the officially-authorized body. The faculty
concerned must be provided with a copy of such added document at least
five days prior.
iii. Faculty have the right of access to all materials in the PAF, exclusive
of pre- employment materials, unless the pre-employment materials are
used in personnel actions.
iv. Faculty may request to inspect their PAFs. A copy of all materials
requested shall be provided within fourteen days. If a faculty member
finds an inaccuracy, he or she may request a correction or deletion. If the
request is denied, the faculty shall have seven days to submit the request
to the President or designee. Within twenty-one days of the request to the
President or designee, the President or designee shall provide to the
faculty member a written response. If the President or designee grants
the request, the record shall be corrected or the deletions made, and the
faculty member shall be sent a written statement to that effect. If the
President or designee denies the request, the response shall include
reasons for denial.
v. PAFs shall be held in confidence, accessible only to persons with
official business. Access to a PAF shall be logged, whose record shall be
part of the PAF itself.
b. Working Personnel Action File (WPAF). The WPAF is a subset of PAF,
including documents assembled for the purpose of a scheduled evaluation. The
WPAF shall include the following:
i. FAR (with an Index of Attachments)
ii. Classroom Visitation Reports
iii. Student evaluations or alternative student evaluation instruments
(summary
reports and completed forms)
iv. Responses and rebuttals

236

v. Faculty-authored reports from sabbatical leaves, difference-in-pay
leaves, mini-grants, and other internal CSUSB grants
vi. All other evaluation materials in the PAF
vii. All current and previous summary statements and recommendations
resulting from the evaluation process
Materials submitted to the WPAF shall be deemed incorporated by reference in
the PAF but need not be physically placed in it. An index of such materials shall
be prepared by faculty and submitted with the materials. Such an index shall be
permanently placed in the PAF.
The original student evaluation forms will be stored in electronic format and
incorporated into the PAF. The actual student evaluation forms will be returned to
the faculty member. Probationary faculty should retain the original forms at least
until the next performance review and tenured Professors, until their next periodic
evaluation.
4. Recommendations: Recommendations shall be made following a thorough review of
the WPAF. All recommenders shall ensure that criteria are applied consistently across
faculty. If there are omissions of documentation, information, or recommendation in the
materials, the materials may be returned for amplification. Amplification documents shall
be provided in a timely manner.
5. Decision: The President or designee shall receive the WPAF, review its contents and
recommendations, and reach a decision. The President's or designee's decision shall be
communicated in writing to the faculty, with the reasons for decision clearly stated.
Performance Review
1. Definitions and general provisions
a. Performance review: Performance review is the process whereby decisions
concerning retention, promotion, and tenure are made. Performance reviews are
based upon information obtained from students, peers, and administrators in the
manner described in this document. Upon completion of deliberations at each
level of performance review, a copy of the recommendation shall be provided to
the evaluated faculty, who may respond in writing within ten days after receipt of
the recommendation and/or request a meeting with the recommending party.
b. Probation: Probation refers to the period of time in which a faculty member

237

demonstrates that he or she is worthy of tenure. The length of probation shall be
six years of full-time service, which is normally the time of service at CSUSB
since initial appointment but may include credited service for experience prior to
appointment.
c. Tenure: Tenure is the faculty member’s right of permanent employment in the
university. Tenure is normally granted after the six-year probationary period
(applying in the sixth year) as defined above and shall be effective at the
beginning of the seventh year.
A probationary faculty member may apply for tenure earlier but not until after four
years of service, including service credit (if applicable), i.e., in the fifth year of the
probationary period. The process and criteria for early tenure are the same as
those for regular tenure.
This time frame for early tenure does not apply to faculty hired before September
10, 2019.
d. Promotion: Promotion is the advancement to a higher rank: From the rank of
Assistant Professor to the rank of Associate Professor and then to the rank of
Professor. These two promotions are sequential: One cannot be promoted to
Professor from Assistant Professor.
i. Promotion to the Rank of Associate Professor: Application for promotion
to Associate normally coincides with the application for tenure, i.e., in the
sixth year of the probationary period.
A probationary faculty member may apply for promotion to Associate
earlier but not until after four years of service, including service credit (if
applicable), i.e., in the fifth year of the probationary period. The process
and criteria for early tenure are the same as those for regular promotion
to Associate.
This time frame for early promotion to Associate does not apply to faculty
hired before September 10, 2019.
ii. Promotion to Professor: Promotion to the rank of Professor is normally
granted after five years of service since promotion to Associate. As such,
application and evaluation take place in the fifth year.
An associate professor may apply for promotion to Professor earlier but
not until after three years of service, i.e., in the fourth year since
promotion to Associate. The process and criteria for early tenure are the
same as those for regular promotion to Professor.

238

This time frame for early promotion to Professor does not apply to faculty
hired before September 10, 2019.
2. Procedures
a. Faculty being evaluated complete the FAR and submit it to the FAD
Office. The faculty should identify and provide materials accessible to
them. Evaluating committees and administrators shall be responsible for
identifying and providing relevant materials not provided by the faculty
concerned.
A specific deadline shall be established for the completion of the WPAF.
Insertion of material after the deadline must be approved by the
Department Evaluation Committee and shall be limited to items that
become accessible after the deadline. Material inserted shall be
forwarded to earlier evaluators for evaluation before consideration by
subsequent evaluators. If, during the review process, a required
evaluation document is found missing, the WPAF shall be returned to the
responsible evaluator, who will then provide the missing document. This
step shall not lead to a delay in the evaluation process.
b. The FAD Office assembles the WPAFs and submits them to the
Department Evaluation Committees and Department Chairs for
concurrent and independent evaluation. If a department chair is
unavailable (e.g. being ineligible due to rank or withdrawing due to conflict
of interest) the evaluated faculty may select three department chairs
within the college and submit their names to the College Dean.
The College Dean shall select one from the three to serve in the capacity
of the department chair.
c. College Evaluation Committees and College Deans concurrently and
independently conduct evaluation. If a College Dean withdraws from the
evaluation process due to conflict of interest, the faculty being evaluated
may choose to select two College Deans and submit their names to the
Provost. The Provost shall select one of the two to serve in the capacity
of the Dean.
d. If recommendations from the Department Evaluation Committee,
Department Chair, College Evaluation Committee, and the College Dean
are unanimous and do not involve non-retention or denial of tenure or
promotion, the WPAF of the evaluated faculty is submitted directly to the
President or designee for a decision.

239

If there is disagreement between any two recommending parties or if the
decision of these parties, although unanimous, leads to non-retention or
denial of tenure or promotion, the WPAFs are submitted to the University
Evaluation Committee for evaluation.
e. When making recommendations for retention, evaluators may
recommend a performance review to take place in the third or fifth
probationary year. Such recommendations shall be placed in the
“Additional Comments” section of the performance review report.
The FAD Office submits the WPAFs to the President or designee for
decision. In addition to decisions regarding retention, promotion, or
tenure, the President or designee may require that a performance review
be conducted in the third or fifth probationary year, following the timeline
used for performance reviews for fourth- year probationary faculty.
Similarly, the classroom visitation schedule for the requested
performance review shall be the same as for fourth-year probationary
faculty.
Periodic Evaluation
1. Definitions and general provisions
a. Applicable faculty: Periodic evaluation applies to faculty who are not
subject to performance review. They are first-, third-, and fifth-year
probationary faculty who are not applying for early tenure or promotion,
and tenured faculty.
b. Purpose: The purpose of periodic evaluation is to assess progress
towards next performance reviews. It is intended to be instructive,
providing guidance for faculty’s success in their RPT process and
beyond.
c. Result: The result of periodic evaluation is a summary statement on the
strengths and weaknesses of the evaluated faculty in all three areas of
evaluation: teaching, research, scholarly or creative contributions and
service to university and/or community. This statement may include
recommendations for improvement. The summary statement is placed in
the PAF and a copy is provided to the faculty member.
2. Procedures
a. Applicable faculty complete their FARs and submit them to the FAD
Office.

240

b. The FAD Office assembles the WPAF.
c. The Department Evaluation Committee and Department Chair jointly
evaluate the faculty and submit their report to the FAD Office.
Evaluation Criteria and Their Application
1. Area of evaluation
a. Teaching: Teaching effectiveness shall be evaluated by the quality of performance of
the faculty member in varied aspects of instruction, such as classroom instruction,
studio instruction, laboratory instruction, supervision of individual projects, and
supervision of fieldwork. Evaluators must recognize the diversity in teaching
approaches, pedagogies, and styles exhibited by the instructional faculty of the
university.
Primary sources of evidence for the quality of instruction shall be faculty activities
reports, classroom visitation reports (with appended materials gathered during the
pre- and post-visitation conferences), student evaluations, alternative teaching
evaluation instruments, and syllabi and major assessment instruments for each new
and revised course. The evaluated faculty may include a teaching portfolio to include
items appended to classroom visitations, course syllabi, lab schedules, examinations
and quizzes, hand-out materials, and others. Evaluators shall consider all materials in
the WPAF.
Quality of instruction shall be evaluated in the following areas:
i. Command of Subject Matter: Credentials presented by the evaluated faculty
upon appointment attest to their initial command of the subject matter.
However, evidence beyond these credentials are also expected to
demonstrate that the evaluated faculty’s command of subject matter is
current.
ii. Course Design/Preparation, Instructional Material, and Organization: Courses
are expected to (a) be aligned with course goals, description, and mode of
instruction (e.g. lab, lecture, seminar); (b) be organized to include learning
activities and strategies that will achieve course goals and enhance student
learning; (c) reflect a reasonable allocation of time and resources; and (d)
have the appropriate use of teaching modes, strategies, techniques, and
instructional materials, including technology. A course syllabus is required for
each course. At the beginning of each course, faculty should make clear to
students the objectives, requirements, assessment standards and methods,
and plan for that course.

241

iii. Effectiveness in Instruction: It is vital that faculty regularly review and modify
course content to meet changing curricular needs. Instructional effectiveness
requires that faculty modify course content to reflect relevance, timeliness,
and comprehensive coverage of central issues and prevailing perspectives in
the discipline. The course content should be delivered using instructional
modes and teaching techniques/strategies suitable for the type and size of
the class being taught.
Effective teaching also requires that content, organization, and delivery are
suitable for both the overall course and the individual class sessions.
Successful experimentation with, and/or teaching research on, innovative
teaching strategies and methods shall also be viewed as evidence for
effective teaching.
iv. Academic assessment of student learning: Fair and thorough assessment of
student learning is an important aspect of effective instruction. Assessment
methods need to be consistent with program goals and course objectives and
capable of distinguishing among different levels of student learning.
Methods of assessment may include examinations, homework, term papers,
laboratory reports, completed special assignments, seminar presentations,
and other means appropriate to the type of class or instructional mode
involved. Documentation of these methods and other pertinent materials in
the WPAF—including examples of student work—constitute evidence for
assessment of student learning.
Faculty should make clear to students what methods will be used to assess
learning and should apply standards appropriate to the level of the course.
b. Research, scholarly or creative contributions: Evaluators must recognize that no
single method exists for faculty to demonstrate performance in research, scholarly
or creative contributions, particularly across disciplines.
i. It shall be the sole responsibility of the evaluated faculty to provide
documented evidence of research, scholarly or creative contributions
referenced in the FAR. Examples of items which may be used are books and
articles (or evidence of their acceptance for publication), proposals,
contracts, grants or programs; letters of invitation or appointment; reviews of
creative activity written by professionally recognized persons; and other
appropriate professionally generated materials.
ii. The faculty member may consult with the Department Chair to ascertain that
the FAR contains a thorough description of his or her professional activities
and reflects a true picture of accomplishments in research, scholarly or
creative contributions.

242

iii. A request for an external review of materials may be initiated at any level of
evaluation by any party. Such a request shall document the special
circumstances which necessitate an outside reviewer. The request must be
approved by the President or designee, with the concurrence of the faculty
member.
When the request for an external review has been approved, the faculty
member shall provide to the FAD Office a list of names from which one or
more evaluators may be chosen. Department Chairs, Evaluation Committees,
and/or College Deans shall consider this list and may opt to provide
additional names to it. The FAD Office, with the consent of the faculty
member, will coordinate the selection of one or more reviewers from this
list.
The external viewers should be, as far as possible, senior and established
scholars in the field. They cannot be the dissertation chair or the primary
dissertation advisor, a personal friend, or a collaborator of any publication or
research effort of the evaluated faculty.
The external review report will be included in the WPAF as an integral part of
the evaluation process.
iv. The Department Evaluation Committee and the Department Chair must
evaluate each item in the area of research, service or creative contributions.
They must address the significance and quality of the contribution in relation
to the form in which the contribution is presented, e.g. publication,
presentation, or work in progress. If the contribution consists of professional
activity such as a consultantship, participation in a professional organization,
or grant and award, the committee and chair must assess its significance and
relevance. If the Department Evaluation Committee or the Department Chair
finds any deficiencies in the faculty member's documentation or has difficulty
evaluating on a particular item, they may request clarification, expansion, or
additional information through the FAD Office. If the evaluated faculty fails
to provide requested information, the Department Evaluation Committee or
the Department Chair shall so indicate in their reports.
v. Evaluation Committees, Department Chairs, and the College Dean shall
consider all materials to determine their appropriateness and quality and, in
light of established criteria, evaluate the faculty member's research, scholarly
or creative contributions.
vi. The following list of research, scholarly or creative contributions is
exemplary. It is not meant to be limiting, definitive, or rank-ordered for
importance. Work professionally evaluated by peers in the field is generally

243

considered to be more significant. Some items on the list may be more
appropriate to some disciplines than others. The individual contribution to
collaborative activities must be clearly stated in the Joint Activity Report.
● Receipt of a fellowship, grant, contract, award, prize, or other evidence
of professional recognition.
● Active participation in seminars, conferences, meetings, or other activity
leading to research, scholarly or creative contributions.
● Continuing education, retraining, and the development of new skills
relevant to one's current or potential work assignment. Evidence of these
activities may be the taking of courses, earning advanced degrees, or
participating in professional conferences, seminars, workshops,
institutes, or special programs which lead to systematic updating of
knowledge.
● Presentations at professional meetings.
● Publications, such as books or texts (whole or part thereof), articles in
journals or periodicals, or any other type of academically specialized form
of output such as music, script, software. Professionally recognized or
refereed publications are generally considered to be more significant.
● Creative activity culminating in a public display or performance such as
might occur in music, art, drama, or poetry reading.
● Active leadership and/or service in recognized professional societies.
(This activity may also be relevant to service to university/community.)
● Consultantships, whether paid or unpaid, of a professional nature.
● Editing, reviewing, indexing, abstracting, or performing other editorial
work for professional or scholarly publications.
● Any other items of specific professional activity, such as work in
progress, research related to instruction, or research on how students
learn and apply knowledge over an extended period of time.
c. Service to university and/or community: In addition to demonstrated teaching
effectiveness and continued research, scholarly or creative activity, faculty must also
participate in professionally related service to the university and/or community.
i. Scope of Service to university and/or community: Faculty are uniquely
qualified to contribute to the mission of the University in a variety of ways,
such as participating in institutional governance, evaluating the teaching of
their colleagues, advising students, and sponsoring student organizations.
Service to community related to the mission of the University brings
recognition not only to the University but also the faculty. Service should be
consistent with the teaching abilities, expertise, and leadership qualities of
the evaluated faculty and should foster an intellectual relationship with the
community. Community may be local, regional, state, national, as well as
international.
Service to the University and/or community shall be demonstrated by
documented evidence submitted with the FAR. The following list—which is

244

not meant to be exhaustive nor are the items ranked-ordered for
preference—provides examples of items that may be included in the FAR.
Service to University
• Active participation in service to and/or governance of programs,
departments, colleges, the campus, and/or the University System.
Activities supported by reassigned time shall be considered in evaluating
the quantity—but not quality—of such work.
• Attendance and active participation at program, department, and college
meetings.
• Active participation on committees at all levels of CSUSB and the CSU,
with emphasis on the departmental and the college levels while at the
Assistant Professor rank.
• Participation in educational equity programs and activities.
• Authorship of documents, reports, or other materials pertinent to the
University's mission or operation.
• Advisor or sponsor to student organizations or clubs on campus.
• Assisting with grants, documents, contracts, proposals, reports, or other
materials pertinent to the University’s mission or operation.
• Active participation in program, Department, College, Campus and/or
University-wide Advisory Groups.
• Completion of classroom visitation reports.
• Academic and/or career advisement of students.
Service to Community
● Service in government at all levels.
● Consultantships to community service groups.
● Media presentations such as interviews, articles, speeches, or other
presentations in newspapers, magazines, radio, television, or film.
● Lectures, speeches, talks, presentations, and/or displays given to
schools, community groups, or the University community.
● Judge at science fairs, art shows, or music contests.
● Active participation and/or office holding in civic, educational service or
humanitarian groups.
● Participation in community partnership activities which enhance social,
economic, and cultural conditions.
ii. Evaluation of Service to university and/or community
The faculty shall describe and provide documentation for service to
university and/or community. Evidence may include—but not be limited to—
letters of invitation, memoranda documenting service, programs,
membership lists, and other appropriate items.
Evaluators evaluate the nature of the service to university and/or community
and its appropriateness to the evaluated faculty’s rank.
a. Evaluation scale: All evaluators shall apply the established criteria to the

245

performance of the evaluated faculty relative to his or her employment status at the
time of the evaluation. A rating of Above Expectations for Retention at the Rank of
Assistant Professor at the Second Year, for example, only means that the evaluated
faculty is deemed Above Expectations as a second-year probationary faculty. It is not
indicative of his or her chances of being promoted or tenured later.
Above Expectations: Above the established criteria.
Meets Expectations: Within the range of the established criteria.
Below Expectations: Below the established range of criteria.
Well Below Expectation: Well below the range of established criteria.
b. Outcomes of evaluation
i. Second-year retention review: If the faculty member is rated at least Meets
Expectations in two areas and no lower than Below Expectations in the third,
he or she will be recommended for Retention at the rank of Assistant
Professor.
Ratings of Below Expectations for Retention at the rank of Assistant
Professor in two areas and at least Meets Expectations in the third also
results in retention. But the retention decision will include recommendations
from the President or designee for successful future reviews.
If the faculty member is rated Well Below Expectations in any of the three
areas or Below Expectations or Well Below Expectation in all three, he or she
will not be recommended for Retention.
ii. Fourth-year retention review: Ratings of Meets Expectations or Above
Expectations in all three areas will result in recommendation for retention.
If the evaluated faculty is rated Below Expectations in any of the three areas
and Meets Expectations (or above) in the other two areas, he or she will be
recommended for Retention; but the retention decision will include
recommendations from the President or designee for successful future
reviews.
If the faculty being evaluated receives Well Below Expectations in one area
or Below Expectations in two or more areas, he or she will not be
recommended for Retention.
iii. Tenure: To be recommended for tenure, the faculty member must receive a
minimum of Meets Expectations in all three areas relevant to the rank held
at the time of evaluation. Any lower rating shall result in not being recommended
for tenure.
iv. Promotion to the rank of Associate Professor
To be recommended for promotion to the rank of Associate Professor, the
faculty member must be evaluated as Above Expectations for one of the
categories and as Meets Expectations or Above Expectations for the other
two categories at the rank of Assistant Professor.

246

If a faculty member is evaluated to be Below Expectations or Well Below
Expectations for promotion to the rank of Associate Professor in any of the
three categories, the faculty member will not be recommended for
promotion to the rank of Associate Professor.
v. Promotion to the rank of Professor: To be recommended for promotion to
Professor, a faculty member must receive the ratings of Above Expectations
in one area and Meets Expectation or Above Expectations in the other two
areas at the rank of Associate Professor. Any lower rating shall result in not
being recommended for promotion to Professor.
3. Application of criteria and rating system
a. General provisions
Early-tenure applications are evaluated according to the same standards and criteria
as those for regular tenure applications.
Early applications for promotion are evaluated according to the same standards and
criteria as those for regular promotion applications.
In progressing through the ranks of Assistant Professor, Associate Professor, and
Professor, the faculty being evaluated will be judged by an increasingly rigorous
application of the criteria.
b. Meets Expectations and Above Expectations in the area of teaching
i. Meets Expectations in the area of teaching
At the rank of Assistant Professor: During years two and three of the
probationary period, the Meets Expectations faculty member at the rank of
Assistant Professor must demonstrate command of the subject matter and strong
indications of developing abilities in the other aspects of teaching.During
subsequent years, competence in all teaching criteria must be evident.
At the rank of Associate Professor: The Meets Expectations faculty member
at the rank of Associate Professor must demonstrate proficiency in each of
the four teaching criteria.
At the rank of Professor: The Meets Expectations faculty member at the rank
of Professor must demonstrate proficiency in each of the four teaching
criteria and a sustained record of involvement and achievement indicative of
a commitment and ability to continue at that level.
ii. Above Expectations in the area of teaching.
To be considered Above Expectations in the area of teaching, the faculty
member must meet the requirements set forth above for Meets
Expectations. He or she must also provide a preponderance of evidence

247

demonstrating excellence in teaching and/or a record of distinction for someb
aspect of teaching at or beyond the University.
c. Meets Expectations and Above Expectations in the area of research, scholarly or
creative contributions Both qualitative and quantitative standards should be used to
evaluate Research, Scholarly or Creative Contributions.
i. Meets Expectations in the Area of Research, Scholarly or Creative
Contributions At the rank of Assistant Professor: During years two and three of
the probationary period, the Meets Expectations faculty at the rank of Assistant
Professor must demonstrate involvement in research, scholarly or creative
activities. In subsequent years, continued active involvement in and
successful completion of some professionally evaluated activities should be
Evident.
At the rank of Associate Professor: The Meets Expectations faculty at the
rank of Associate Professor must demonstrate a record of active involvement
in and successful accomplishment of research, scholarly or creative activities.
Successful accomplishment at this level normally requires some continued
completion of professionally evaluated activities.
At the rank of Professor: The Meets Expectations faculty at the rank of
Professor must demonstrate a record of successful accomplishment and
recognition in research, scholarly or creative activities.
ii. Above Expectations in the area of research, scholarly or creative
contributions
To receive Above Expectations, the evaluated faculty must, as a minimum,
have met the requirement set forth above for meets expectations
appropriate to rank. In addition, he or she must have attained recognition
beyond the University in research, scholarly activity, and/or creative activity.
d. Meets Expectations and Above Expectations in the area of service to university
and/or community
1. Meets Expectations in the area of service
At the rank of Assistant Professor: The Meets Expectations faculty should
demonstrate a developing level of participation in service, particularly at the
departmental and college levels. To receive tenure, the Meets Expectations
faculty member must demonstrate significant participation in the area of
service.
At the rank of Associate Professor: The Meets Expectations faculty at this
rank must demonstrate significant participation in the area of service. For a
faculty member hired at this rank, a Meets Expectations rating may be

248

assigned for demonstrating sufficient progress towards meeting this
standard by the third probationary year.
At the rank of Professor: In addition to significant participation in service
activities, the Meets Expectations faculty at this rank is expected to provide
effective leadership in some of these activities and demonstrate a sustained
commitment to these leadership roles. For a faculty member hired at this
rank, a Meets Expectations rating may be assigned for demonstrating
sufficient progress towards meeting this standard by the third probationary
year.
2. Above Expectations in the area of service
A rating of Above Expectations in this area is awarded for exceptional service
that has been clearly documented, both quantitatively and qualitatively.
To be considered Above Expectations in the area of service, the faculty
member must meet the qualifications set forth above for Meets Expectations
appropriate to academic rank. In addition, he or she must demonstrate
unusual effectiveness or performance as a contributor or leader in the
University, the community, or both.
Periodic Evaluation of Tenured Faculty
1. Purpose: The purpose of periodic evaluation of tenured faculty is to assure continued
excellence in teaching; research, scholarly or creative contributions; and service to the
university and/or community. This process is intended to be both positive and
supportive.
2. Procedure
a. Tenured faculty members shall be subject to periodic evaluation at intervals of not
more than five (5) years. Periodic evaluations shall be conducted jointly by the
Department Evaluation Committee and the Department Chair.
b. Participants in the Faculty Early Retirement Program (FERP) may serve on the
Department Evaluation Committee in the evaluation of tenured faculty. However,
they cannot be the sole members of the said committee.
c. Participants in the FERP shall not be required to undergo periodic evaluation unless
requested by either the FERP participant or an appropriate administrator.
d. If more than 25% of tenured faculty in a department are scheduled for periodic
evaluation, the Department Chair may determine by a random method a one-year
postponement of some reviews to reduce the number to less than 25%. The random
process thus used shall be supervised by the chair of the Department Evaluation

249

Committee.
Also subject to periodic evaluation are tenured faculty whose previous evaluations
resulted in a decision to review in less than five (5) years.
e. During the Fall Semester of the evaluation year, those tenured faculty scheduled for
periodic evaluation shall submit a FAR to their college office. The FAR shall cover
activities in the previous five (5) years or since the last evaluation.
f. The following materials shall be assembled into a WPAF.
I. A FAR covering the previous five (5) years or since the last evaluation.
II. Student evaluations and alternative student evaluation instruments.
III. Other materials deemed relevant by the reviewed faculty.
The Department Evaluation Committee and Department Chair shall jointly review
the assembled file and prepare a summary report, using the format found in
Appendix 7, commenting on the overall effectiveness of the faculty member's
performance, outlining strengths and opportunities for improvement, specifying
remedies, if any, and indicating when the next review shall take place.
g. A copy of this report shall be given to the faculty member who shall have the right to
submit a written response, which may be a rebuttal.
h. The WPAF, summary report and response (if any) shall be forwarded to the
appropriate College Dean for review. The Dean, the Department Chair, the Chair of
the Departmental Evaluation Committee, and the faculty being reviewed shall meet
to discuss the report and any recommendations made in the report. The report,
along with a statement from the College Dean formalizing the time of the next
scheduled evaluation, shall then become a part of the faculty’s PAF.
i. The review process for the periodic evaluation of tenured faculty shall be completed
in accordance with the timetable for periodic evaluation and Performance review
prepared by the FAD Office and approved by the Senate each year.
3. Criteria: Tenured faculty shall be evaluated in the areas of teaching; research, scholarly
or creative contributions; and service to the University and community. The criteria are
the same as those for faculty subject to performance review.
4. Exclusion: Members of the Department Evaluation Committee are required to recuse
themselves from their own review.
5. Delays in Review: It is recognized that unforeseen situations may warrant a delay in
periodic evaluation. Requests for a delay shall be made in writing, clearly stating reasons

250

that must be serious and compelling. These requests must be submitted to the
Department Chair. The normal term of delay is one year. Delays of more than one year
may be granted in exceptional circumstances, such as a multiyear leave of absence. The
more than one-year delay may be granted by the College Dean upon recommendation
by the Department Chair in consultation with the Department Evaluation Committee.
Departmental Guidelines
1. Overview: Academic departments may opt to create discipline/program specific
guidelines for the evaluation of its tenure-line faculty. These guidelines must be in line
with the university-wide criteria as specified above and, at the same time, provide
guidance to faculty on those items that tend to have greater applicability for their
academic area. The departmental guidelines cannot supersede or exclude the criteria
listed above, nor impose any pedagogical technique or approach on the department
faculty.
2. General requirements
a. Teaching: Departments may describe, in general terms, instructional techniques or
pedagogical approaches which are perhaps better suited for their
disciplines/programs.
b. Research, scholarly or creative contributions: Departments may indicate which of the
professional activities listed above in this policy are more appropriate for the
discipline/program and may suggest how best to engage in those activities to
achieve professional accomplishments. Guidelines must avoid setting specific
quantitative goals, since each evaluation committee must evaluate both quantitative
and qualitative aspects of professional activities and achievements.
Additionally, strict rank ordering of items shall be avoided, but clear identification of
the most appropriate professional growth activities is encouraged.
c. Service: Departments may indicate which service activities listed above in this policy
may be more appropriate for the discipline/program, a given rank experience of the
faculty member.
3. Procedure for approval: Department chairs are responsible for ensuring that the
guidelines are developed (or amended) with the full participation of all tenure-line faculty in the
department and in consultation with the appropriate College Dean. Guidelines and subsequent
modifications must receive, by secret ballot, approval from a majority of the Department faculty
and approval through the normal Faculty Senate process, which will include a two-reading vote
on the floor of the Senate. Faculty Senate consideration shall be limited to determining whether
the proposed guidelines are in line with the standards and Criteria established in this document,
including academic freedom in the area of research, scholarly, and creative activities.
Departmental guidelines are implemented in the following way.

251

a. Faculty who were hired before the approval of the departmental guidelines may opt to
adopt either the departmental guidelines or the university-wide criteria established in this
document for their evaluation.
b. Faculty who are hired after the approval of the departmental guidelines must be
evaluated according to them.
4. Distribution of guidelines
Department Chairs are responsible for distributing departmental guidelines in the Fall Semester
each year to faculty who may be undergoing evaluation in that year.
For new faculty, department Chairs shall both provide a written copy of the guidelines and meet
with them to discuss the content of guidelines.

FAM 652.2
EVALUATION OF LECTURERS
FAM 652.2 Evaluation Of Lecturers.pdf
Purpose and Scope
Lecturers play a vital part in the mission of the university. The evaluation of lecturers is thus an
important process that helps ensure the quality of instruction for students. This document sets
forth policies and processes for the evaluation of lecturers.
The major aspects of the evaluation of lecturers are stipulated in the Collective Bargaining
Agreement (CBA). What is specified in this document is meant to implement the CBA, not to
replace any element of it. If a provision in this document is found to be inconsistent with a
future CBA, the CBA shall prevail.
Lecturer evaluation is intended to aid the decision about the lecturer's future appointment and
the department's decision about the lecturer's assignment.
This policy shall refer to FAM 652.1: Evaluation of Tenure-Line Faculty where necessary, as
some aspects of evaluation are the same for both lecturers and tenure-line faculty.
Definitions
1. Lecturer: A non-tenure-line, unit-three employee who provides academic instruction to
students. Such instruction is provided generally-although not always—under a course
found in the CSUSB Catalog (e.g., MATH XXXX, ENG XXXX). A lecturer may teach on any
time base and may be on any type of appointments (e.g., Academic Term, Academic
Year, Three-Year, or Multiterm (see below).
2. Department: An academic department or academic school (e.g., School of Social Work
and School of Computer Science and Engineering).
252

3. Department chair: The chair of a department or the director of a school.
4. WPAF: Working Personnel Action File.
5. Appointment: Written agreement between the university and the lecturer that setsforth the
terms and conditions of employment.
Policy Statement
Lecturers in the university are typically hired by a department and occasionally by a college via
the following types of appointment:
1. Academic Term: Appointment for one academic term.
2. Academic Year: Appointed for an academic year.
3. Three Year: Appointed for three academic years per Article 12 of the CBA.
4. Multiterm: Appointed for more than one term but excluding 2 and 3 above.
Lecturers shall be evaluated on the duties as defined in their appointment. Accomplishments
and activities beyond these duties, including but not limited to participation in course
development and inclusion of high-impact practices in their courses, shall be considered if they
are closely related to their appointment assignments. It is the evaluated lecturer's responsibility
to document these accomplishments and activities and to demonstrate their connections with
their appointment assignments.
All aspects of evaluation shall be confidential.
Evaluated lecturers shall have the right to respond to or rebut the evaluation report(s).
Lecturers hired by a department are evaluated jointly by either the Department Evaluation
Committee or the Lecturer Evaluation Committee (see below on committee) and the
department chair. Lecturers hired by a college are evaluated by either the College Evaluation
Committee or the College Lecturer Evaluation Committee (see below on committee) and the
college dean. Lecturers hired by the University Honors Program are evaluated by the Honors
Director and an evaluation committee composed of tenured faculty who also teach in the
Honors program. Lecturers with joint appointments shall be evaluated separately in each
department or other unit.
Accumulating Documentation
Effective and fair evaluations of lecturers rely on evidence and documentation collected
throughout the year. For most lecturers, whose sole or primary responsibility is teaching,
evidence and documentation come from three sources.
1. Class visitation. The process for class visitation for lecturers is the same as it is for

253

tenure-line faculty (FAM 652.1). A class visitation results in a report filed by the visitor,
which becomes official documentation for evaluation.
a. All lecturers shall be visited in the term in which they begin their employment and in
any new course they are assigned to teach.
b. Lecturers with three year appointments are visited at least once in an evaluation
cycle.
c. Subsequent and additional visitations of lecturers may be scheduled by the
Department/College Evaluation Committee or Department/College Lecturer Evaluation
Committee (see below) or Honors Program Lecturer Evaluation Committee. Additional
visitations may also be scheduled at the request of the lecturer or an appropriate
administrator.
2. Student Evaluations. The student evaluations for lecturers are administered in the same
way as they are for tenure line faculty (FAM 652.1). For those lecturers whose
assignment is supervision, student evaluations related to supervision shall be used
instead.
a. Lecturers with Academic Term, Academic-Year or Multiterm appointments are
required to have all of their classes evaluated.
b. Lecturers with Three-Year appointments may exclude up to 20% of the courses
evaluated from being used for evaluation in a given academic year. The exclusion
should not negatively affect the representativeness of the lecturer’s teaching
portfolio as determined jointly by the department chair (or equivalent) and the
evaluated lecturer. In the event of disagreement about what courses are deemed
representative," each party shall select 50% of the courses as representative. If this
selection process results in student evaluations not being included for evaluation,
the department chair and the lecturer concerned will sign a statement indicating
which student evaluations shall be excluded. The signed statement shall be placed in
the lecturer's WPAF.
3. Other evidence/documentation. For lecturers with accomplishments beyond and related
to those that are specified in their appointment, they may include the documentation
for these accomplishments for evaluation.
Procedure and Process
The evaluation of lecturers is conducted primarily at the department level. Lecturers who are
eligible for three-year appointments or reappointments are also evaluated at the college level,
and the provost conducts a final review in cases where the department rates the lecturer as
satisfactory and the Dean rates the lecturer as unsatisfactory. The Office of Faculty Affairs and
Development (FAD) coordinates the evaluation process.

254

1. Committee for evaluation
The committee for the evaluation of lecturers may be the Department Evaluation
Committee, which is created in accordance with FAM 652.1 (three tenured faculty, two
of whom must be at the rank of professor). It may also be a separate committee
(Lecturer Evaluation Committee) if the department so chooses based on a vote of the
tenure-line faculty. This committee will be composed of at least three tenured faculty
elected via the same process for the Department Evaluation Committee. The chair of
the committee is elected by committee members. The department chair (or equivalent)
cannot be an elected committee member. The department chair (or equivalent),
instead, conducts the evaluation jointly with the committee.
Lecturers hired by or assigned to teach in a college may be evaluated by the College
Evaluation Committee or a College Lecturer Evaluation Committee. The College
Lecturer Evaluation Committee shall be elected in the same way as the Department
Lecturer Evaluation Committee.
If a Lecturer Evaluation Committee is composed (at either the department or college
level), it will assume the responsibilities in all aspects of lecturer evaluation as specified
in FAM 652.1 (e.g., assignment of class visitation). The tenure-line Evaluation
Committee shall be released of these responsibilities. The University Honors program
should elect an evaluation committee by nominating faculty who have disciplinary
expertise relevant to the Honors Program. The Honors Director shall supply the Faculty
Senate with a list of faculty who are eligible to vote in this election, and the Faculty
Senate Elections Committee shall administer the election. The Honors Director works
jointly with the committee in the same manner that a department chair works with a
departmental lecturer evaluation committee.
2. Lecturer WPAF
a. Evaluation of lecturers shall be based solely on the lecturer's WPAF.
b. The department (normally), or college (in the case of lecturers who are being
evaluated for their teaching in the college), or Honors Program (in the case of
lecturers being evaluated for their teaching for the University Honors Program) shall
be responsible for assembling and maintaining the WPAFs and delivering them to
the committee that evaluates the lecturers.
i. For lecturers whose responsibility is solely teaching, the WPAF shall include a
Lecturer Evaluation Form (See Appendix), a list of all classes taught during
the evaluation cycle, student evaluation results, visitation reports, previous
years' evaluation reports (if applicable), and documentation for excluded
student evaluations (if applicable). It may also include other information as
deemed appropriate jointly by the department/college and the lecturer as

255

specified in Item 3 under the Accumulating Documentation section.
ii. For lecturers whose duties are primarily teaching but include other, non
teaching assignments, the activities and accomplishments in these
assignments shall be included in addition to the items listed in (i) above.
iii. For lecturers whose assignments are solely or primarily non-teaching, a
Faculty Activity Report (FAR) shall be submitted by the lecturer to the college
office. The requirements for the FAR are the same as those for tenure-line
faculty as stipulated in FAM 652.1.
3. Frequency of Evaluation
a. Lecturers with Academic Term appointments shall be evaluated at the discretion of
the department chair or appropriate administrator. Lecturers themselves can also
request evaluation.
b. Lecturers with Academic Year appointments shall be evaluated in the last term of
their appointment. The review period for lecturers on Academic Year appointments
would include the Spring and Fall semesters immediately preceding the term in
which the evaluation is conducted. (e.g., For an evaluation conducted in Spring 2022,
the lecturer would be evaluated on their teaching in Spring 2021 and Fall 2021.)
c. Lecturers with Three-Year appointments shall be evaluated in the last term of their
appointment. More frequent evaluations may be conducted upon the request of the
lecturer or at the discretion of the president or designee. The review period for
lecturers on Three Year appointments would include the six semesters preceding the
term in which the evaluation is conducted. (e.g., For an evaluation conducted in
Spring 2023, the lecturer would be evaluated on their teaching from Spring 2020 to
Fall 2022.)
d. Lecturers who are being reviewed to determine if they are to receive their initial
Three Year appointment shall be evaluated on all of their teaching for the prior six
years.
e. Lecturers with Multiterm appointments shall be evaluated at least once during the
appointment period.
4. Process and timeline for evaluation
a. Lecturer evaluation typically takes place in the spring term. However, the department
or college may opt to conduct the evaluation in other terms. The Office of FAD will work
together with Deans’ Offices, department chairs, and departmental staff to determine
which lecturers must be evaluated.

256

b. Evaluators receive lecturers' WPAFs by the end of the second week of the term.
c. Departmental evaluators conduct evaluations and fill out parts 1 and 2 of the Lecturer
Evaluation Form (Appendix A or B) in subsequent weeks. The evaluation shall include a
rating of the lecturer as either satisfactory or unsatisfactory. If the department evaluates
a lecturer as unsatisfactory, reasons for the rating shall be provided.
d. No later than the end of the ninth week of the term, the department/college/Honors
Program must send a copy of the completed evaluation to the lecturer. The Office of
FAD will work with the department/college/Honors Program to distribute the evaluations
to lecturers.
e. If a lecturer decides to respond to or rebut the departmental evaluation result, they
must submit the response or rebuttal within ten (10) calendar days of receipt of the
evaluation result. The response/rebuttal should be submitted to the unit (department,
college, or Honors program, see section 2b) responsible for maintaining the WPAF and
included in the WPAF.
f. For all lecturers except those eligible for three-year appointments or re-appointments,
the lecturer will be eligible for a contract renewal if the departmental evaluation is
Satisfactory. For lecturers who are eligible for a three-year appointment or
reappointment, the procedure continues as specified in sections g through k below.
g. For lecturers who are eligible for appointment or reappointment to a three-year
term, the department chair shall notify the college dean by the end of the eleventh week
of the term that the Lecturer Evaluation Forms are available for their review.
The Dean conducts the evaluation after reviewing the WPAF, the departmental
evaluation, and the response or rebuttal (if applicable). The Dean completes section
3 of the Lecturer Evaluation Form (Appendix B), including a rating of the lecturer as
either satisfactory or unsatisfactory. If the Dean evaluates a lecturer as
unsatisfactory, reasons for the rating shall be provided.
h. No later than the end of the thirteenth week of the term, the Dean must send a copy
of the completed evaluation to the lecturer. The Office of FAD will work with the
Deans to distribute the evaluations to lecturers.
i. If a lecturer decides to respond to or rebut the Dean’s evaluation result, they must
submit the response or rebuttal within ten (10) calendar days of receipt of the
evaluation result. The response/rebuttal should be submitted to the unit
(department, college, or Honors program, see section 2b) responsible for
maintaining the WPAF and included in the WPAF.
j. A three-year appointment will be granted if the lecturer is evaluated as satisfactory
by the Dean or appropriate administrator.

257

k. The Provost shall provide a final level of review only in cases where a lecturer who is
eligible for a three-year appointment or reappointment has been evaluated as
satisfactory by the department and unsatisfactory by the Dean. The Provost
completes section 4 of the Lecturer Evaluation Form (Appendix B) rating the lecturer
as satisfactory or unsatisfactory after reviewing the WPAF, the departmental and
Dean’s evaluations, and all responses or rebuttals (if applicable). If the Provost
evaluates a lecturer as unsatisfactory, reasons for the rating shall be provided. A
copy of the report shall be sent to the lecturer by the end of the term. The Office of
FAD will work with the Provost to distribute the evaluations to lecturers. A threeyear appointment will be granted if the lecturer is evaluated as satisfactory by the
Provost.
5. Criteria for Evaluation
a. Teaching: the criteria for teaching are the same as for tenure-line faculty's
performance review (FAM 652.1).
b. Non-teaching: the criteria for non-teaching duties are the same as for tenure-line
faculty to reflect the scope of the duties specified in the evaluated lecturer's
appointment (FAM 652.1).
Appendix A: Evaluation form for all lecturers except those eligible for three-year
contracts
Part 1: Information [to be filled out by department committee and chair]
Name:
Department:
Type of Appointment: ☐Academic Term; ☐Academic Year; ☐Multiterm
Time base: ☐ (1.0) ☐(less than 1.0)
Period under review: (Term) to (Term)
Courses taught during the evaluation cycle:
Part 2: Evaluation [to be filled out by committee and chair]
Provide a summary evaluation of the quality of performance in the following areas.
Teaching. Comment on Command of the Subject Matter, Course Design/Preparation,
Instructional Material and Organization, Effectiveness in Instruction, and Academic
Assessment of Students, using information from the following sources. (Not all sections
may be applicable. For example, classroom visitation reports and student evaluations
may not be available in the WPAFs of lecturers with entirely supervision assignments.)

258

a. Classroom Visitation reports
b. Student Evaluations
c. Other information found in the WPAF
Research, scholarly or creative contributions (if applicable)
University and/or community service (if applicable)
Indicate whether the lecturer's performance is satisfactory or unsatisfactory and provide
reasons for your evaluation.
☐Satisfactory
☐Unsatisfactory
Signed and dated by:
[NAME OF COMMITTEE CHAIR, DATE]
[NAME OF DEPT. CHAIR, DATE]
[NAME OF COMMITTEE MEMBER, DATE]
[NAME OF COMMITTEE MEMBER, DATE]
[More signatures may be added as needed.]
Appendix B: Lecturer Evaluation Form For 3 Year Appointments
Part 1: Information [to be filled out by department or college office]
Name:
Department:
Type of Appointment: Three-Year
Time base: ☐ (1.0) ☐(less than 1.0)
Period under review: (Term) to (Term)
Courses taught during the evaluation cycle:
Part 2: Departmental Evaluation [to be filled out by committee and chair]
Provide a summary evaluation of the quality of performance in the following areas.
Teaching. Comment on Command of the Subject Matter, Course Design/Preparation,
Instructional Material and Organization, Effectiveness in Instruction, and Academic
Assessment of Students, using information from the following sources. (Not all sections
may be applicable. For example, classroom visitation reports and student evaluations
may not be available in the WPAFs of lecturers with entirely supervision assignments.)
d. Classroom Visitation reports
259

e. Student Evaluations
f. Other information found in the WPAF
Research, scholarly or creative contributions (if applicable)
University and/or community service (if applicable)
Indicate whether the lecturer's performance is satisfactory or unsatisfactory and provide
reasons for your evaluation.
☐Satisfactory
☐Unsatisfactory
Signed and dated by:
[NAME OF COMMITTEE CHAIR, DATE]
[NAME OF DEPT. CHAIR, DATE]
[NAME OF COMMITTEE MEMBER, DATE]
[NAME OF COMMITTEE MEMBER, DATE]
[More signatures may be added as needed.]
Part 3: Dean’s Evaluation
Indicate whether the lecturer's performance is satisfactory or unsatisfactory and provide
reasons for your evaluation.
☐Satisfactory
☐Unsatisfactory
Provide any comments (required if unsatisfactory)
Reviewed by [NAME OF DEAN; DATE]
Part 4: Provost’s Evaluation (only for cases in which the department evaluation is
satisfactory and the Dean’s evaluation is unsatisfactory)
Indicate whether the lecturer's performance is satisfactory or unsatisfactory.
☐Satisfactory
☐Unsatisfactory
Provide any comments (required if unsatisfactory)
Reviewed by [NAME OF PROVOST; DATE
\

260

FAM 652.3
EVALUATION OF STUDENT SERVICES PROFESSIONALS, ACADEMIC RELATED
FAM 652.3 Evaluation of Student Services Professionals, Academic Related

Table of Contents
Table of Contents
Purpose and Scope
Policy Statement
Overview of Evaluation
Performance evaluation
Periodic evaluation
Criteria for Performance evaluation
Rating System and its Application to performance Evaluation
Criteria for periodic evaluation
Approvals
History
Purpose and Scope
By providing students special and specific academic services, Student Services Professionals,
Academic Related (SSPARs) play a vital role in the mission of the university. This policy sets
forth provisions that govern all aspects of the evaluation of SSPARs, a process critical for
maintaining and enhancing the quality of SSPARs.
Provisions contained in this document are in accordance with the 1995-97 Memorandum of
Understanding (MOU) between the CSU and the CFA as referenced in the CBA. If discrepancy is
found between this document and the MOU, the MOU shall prevail.
In this document, the term SSPARs refers to faculty in Unit-Three who are counselors in the
Psychological Counseling Center and Student Services Professionals, Academic Related in other
areas of the Student Affairs Division.
Policy Statement
The purpose of evaluation is to develop and maintain high quality SSPARs who are intellectually
and professionally active and who communicate effectively with students.
The evaluation process is designed to provide constructive guidance to SSPARs in achieving

261

intellectual growth and professional development to ensure the protection of SSPAR, student,
and institutional interests.
Overview of Evaluation
1. Types of evaluation
There are two types of evaluation. First is performance review, which is applicable to all
probationary SSPARs for purposes of determining retention, tenure, and/or promotion.
Tenured SSPARs may request consideration for promotion by completing and submitting
appropriate documentation as listed below.
The second type of evaluation is periodic evaluation, which is applicable to all SSPARs
not subject to performance review.
2. General provisions of evaluation. Several general provisions apply to both periodic
evaluation and performance review.
a. Only tenured SSPARs, faculty, librarians, and student services administrators
may engage in the evaluation of other SSPARs. Evaluation criteria and
procedures shall be made available to SSPARs before the evaluation process
begins. No changes may be made during the evaluation process.
b. At all levels of review, before recommendations are forwarded to the next
evaluation level, SSPARs shall be given a copy of each recommendation stating in
writing the reasons for the recommendation. SSPARs have the right to respond
or
submit a rebuttal within seven days following receipt of the recommendation. A
copy of the response or rebuttal statement shall accompany the Working
Personnel Action File (WPAF) and shall be sent to any previous levels of review.
Upon request, the SSPAR may be provided an opportunity to discuss the
recommendation with the recommending party. This provision shall not require
that evaluation timelines be altered.
c. Personnel recommendations or decisions relating to retention, tenure,
promotion, termination, or any other personnel action shall be based primarily
on material contained in the Personnel Action File (PAF). If a personnel
recommendation or decision is based on reasons not contained in the PAF, the
party making the recommendation or decision shall commit those reasons to
writing and this signed statement shall be placed in the Personnel Action File and
a copy provided to the SSPAR.

262

d. In cases of promotion, evaluation committee members must have a higher
rank than those being considered for promotion.
e. Recommendations shall be confidential.
f. Timetables for performance review and periodic evaluation are prepared at
the beginning of each academic year by the Office of Faculty Affairs and
Development and approved by the Faculty Senate. For SSPARs, the timetables
shall be prepared in consultation with, and with the approval of, the Vice
President for Student Affairs.
3. Evaluation committee: Composition and Functions
a. SSPAR Evaluation Committee
i. Composition: The SSPAR Evaluation Committee shall be composed of three
elected tenured members, one of whom must be at the rank of SSPAR Ill. The
remaining two may be SSPAR Ill, II or SSPAR I. The committee shall elect its
chair who shall hold the rank of SSPAR Ill or II. No committee member shall
participate in deliberations concerning his/her own evaluation or the
evaluation of individuals holding higher rank. During the election process, an
alternate may be selected to serve in the event of disqualification of a
committee member. In the event of insufficient eligible/willing members to
serve on the SSPAR Evaluation Committee, the tenured SSPARs shall elect
members from other academic discipline(s). Such election shall take place by
assembling a panel of eligible members from among whom the necessary
members shall be chosen. A member of this committee shall not serve
concurrently as a member of the University Evaluation Committee.
ii. Functions: This committee shall conduct performance review as well as
period evaluation of SSPARs at the departmental level.
b. University Evaluation Committee
i. Composition: The University Evaluation Committee shall be composed of one
tenured Professor elected from each College by the tenure-line faculty of the
College; one tenured Librarian elected by the tenure-line librarians; and one
tenured SSPAR. Department Chairs or Associate Deans may not serve on this
committee. Library Evaluators may serve on this committee but must
withdraw whenever a librarian to be evaluated has been evaluated by them.

263

Members shall serve two-year staggered terms. The Committee shall elect its
Chair. A member of this committee cannot serve concurrently as a member
of a Department, Library, SSPAR or College Evaluation Committee.
ii. Functions: This committee shall conduct performance review for faculty
members at the University level in cases where recommendations from the
Department, Department Chair, College and Dean are not unanimous as well
as in cases involving non-retention, and denial of tenure or promotion. This
committee shall also serve as the higher-level peer review committee for
librarians and SSPARs. In addition, the committee shall rank faculty in
promotion cases, basing their rankings primarily on previous
recommendations and rankings.
4. Instruments of evaluation
a. SSPAR Activities Report (SSPAR AR) - To be completed by all SSPARs subject to
performance review and by probationary and full-time temporary SSPARs subject to
periodic evaluation. These shall cover all three areas of evaluation: professional
assignment, professional activities and Service to university and/or community and
shall reflect the cumulative record since appointment. Supporting documentation
must be attached (for example, active participation in professional societies,
professional participation as a principal consultant in the area of public service,
reprints of speeches or presentations to community groups, etc.) as follows:
i. For probationary SSPARs being considered for retention and tenured SSPARs
applying for promotion, all supporting documentation since the last
performance review.
ii. For probationary SSPARs applying for early tenure and/or early promotion,
all supporting documentation since appointment.
iii. For all others, all supporting documentation since the last performance
review.
SSPARs may include professional activities carried out prior to appointment. Preemployment dates of such activities should be noted. The entire professional
experience of the SSPAR should be examined and considered, but primary
consideration shall be given to the professional accomplishments since
Appointment.

264

b. Once each quarter the supervisor of the program to which the SSPAR is assigned will
schedule and give campus wide publicity to meetings at which students are given the
opportunity to comment on the performance of SSPAR employees. Each quarter at least
twelve such hours will be reserved for this purpose. The meetings will be scheduled so
that day and evening students will have adequate opportunity to participate. Attending
these meetings will be the employee's supervisor and a member of the SSPAR
Evaluation Committee. Another committee member will be on call during meeting hours
in the event the attending member is the subject of student comments and must be
excused from participation. The supervisor and committee members will have five
working days to determine if the student comments are of substance, and as a result,
should be forwarded to the Personnel Action File of the SSPAR. When such comments
are to be forwarded to the Personnel Action File, the supervisor will ask the student
author(s) of the comments to provide them in written form in a signed statement. Such
statements are included in the Personnel Action File for review and action, However,
before such statements are incorporated into the employee Personnel Action File, the
student(s) involved will be advised that employees have the right to inspect, review and
rebut contents of their Personnel Action File. The schedule of the periodic evaluation
and performance review shall not be delayed by this section. Any statements completed
pursuant to this section will be promptly included in the Personnel Action File for review
at the next level.
5. FILES
a. The Personnel Action File (PAF)
i. A Personnel Action File shall be maintained for each SSPAR.
ii. An SSPAR shall have the right to submit additional materials to his/her PAF
and shall have the right to submit a written rebuttal to any material in
his/her file. Only material identified by source may be placed in the PAF.
Identification shall indicate the author, the committee, the campus office, or
the name of the officially authorized body generating the material. The
SSPAR shall be provided with a copy of any material to be placed in the PAF
at least five days prior to the placement.
iii. An SSPAR shall have the right of access to all material in his/her PAF,
exclusive of pre-employment materials, except when the pre- employment
materials are used in personnel actions.
iv. The PAF may be inspected by the SSPAR upon request. A copy of all materials

265

requested shall be provided within fourteen days of the request. If the SSPAR
believes that any portion of the file is not accurate, a correction or deletion
of those materials may be requested. If the request is denied, the SSPAR shall
have seven days to submit the request to the President. Within twenty-one
days of the request to the President, the President shall provide to the SSPAR
a written response. If the President grants the request, the record shall be
corrected or the deletions made, and the SSPAR shall be sent a written
statement to that effect. If the President denies the request, the response
shall include the reason(s) for denial.
iv. The PAF shall be held in confidence. Access to an SSPARs file shall be limited
to persons with official business. For SSPARs, the Office of the Vice President
for Student Services shall log all instances of access to a PAF. This record shall
be a part of the file.
b. Working Personnel Action File (WPAF)
i. The Working Personnel Action File refers to the portion of the Personnel Action File
used during the time of periodic evaluation or performance review of an SSPAR. The
WPAF shall include where required the following:
• SSPAR Activities Report reflecting the cumulative record in all areas of
evaluation;
• Responses and rebuttals;
• All other evaluation materials appropriately included in the PAF;
• All current and previous summary statements and recommendations resulting
from the evaluation process.
ii. Materials submitted to the WPAF by an SSPAR for evaluation purposes shall
be deemed incorporated by reference in the PAF but need not be physically
placed in the file. An index of such materials shall be prepared by the SSPAR
and submitted with the materials. Such an index shall be permanently placed
in the PAF.
6. Recommendations. Recommendations shall be made following a thorough review of
the WPAF relative to each applicable criterion. All participants who make
recommendations shall, in addition, ensure that criteria are applied equally for each
SSPAR evaluated. If there are omissions of documentation, information or

266

recommendations in the materials submitted for review, the materials may be returned
for amplification. Any such amplification shall be provided in a timely manner.
7. Decision. The President or designee shall receive the WPAF, review its contents and
recommendations, and reach a decision. The President's or designee's decision shall be
communicated in writing to the faculty member and shall state the reasons for the
decision.
Performance Review
1. Definitions
a. Performance review. Performance review is the process whereby decisions
concerning retention, promotion, and tenure are made. Performance reviews are
based upon information obtained from students, peers, and administrators in the
manner described below. Upon completion of deliberations at each level of
performance review, a copy of the recommendation shall be forwarded to the
SSPAR, who may respond in writing within seven days after receipt of the
recommendation and/or request a meeting with the recommending party.
b. Probation. The normal period of probation shall be six years of credited service or
full-time probationary service. A year of service for an SSPAR in an academic year
position is three consecutive quarters of employment within an academic year. Any
deviation from the normal six-year probationary period shall be the decision of the
President or designee, following consideration of recommendations from the SSPAR
supervisor, the SSPAR Evaluation Committee, and the University Evaluation
Committee.
A probationary SSPAR in the second year of service shall be notified by the President
or designee of a final decision on retention no later than February 15. A
probationary SSPAR who has served more than two years of probation shall be
notified by the President or designee of a final decision on retention or a terminal
year appointment no later than June 1.
c. Tenure. Tenure is the right of an SSPAR to continue permanent employment at the
campus except when such employment is voluntarily terminated or terminated by
the employer pursuant to the provisions of a collective bargaining agreement or law.

267

The President or designee may award tenure to an SSPAR after a six-year
probationary period. Upon application by a candidate and consideration of positive
recommendations from the SSPAR supervisor(s) and evaluation committees, the
President or designee may award tenure before the end of the six-year probationary
period. Tenure shall be effective at the beginning of the academic year succeeding
the year in which tenure is awarded.
d. Promotion. Promotion is the advancement to a higher rank of a probationary or
tenured SSPAR. A probationary SSPAR shall not normally be promoted during
probation. A probationary SSPAR shall normally be considered for promotion at the
same time he/she is considered for tenure. Probationary SSPARs shall not be
promoted beyond the rank of SSPAR II.
A SSPAR in the rank of SSPAR equivalent may be considered for promotion after
completing one year of service in rank. Upon application by the candidate and
following consideration of positive recommendations from evaluation committees
and SSPAR supervisor(s), probationary SSPARs may be promoted to the rank of
SSPAR II.
Promotion of a tenured SSPAR shall normally be considered upon reaching the
highest step in a rank. If an SSPAR requests in writing to the Vice President for
Student Services not to be considered, this provision shall not apply. Upon
application, and following consideration of positive recommendations from
evaluation committees and SSPAR supervisor(s), an SSPAR may be promoted from
any step lower than the top step in the individual's rank.
The President or designee shall notify the SSPAR in writing of the final decision on
promotion no later than June 15. Such notification shall include the reasons for
approval or denial and shall indicate the effective date of the promotion.
e. Ranking. All SSPARs recommended for promotion shall be ranked in order of
preference. The same criteria will be utilized in ranking that were used in
recommendations for promotion.
The SSPAR Evaluation Committee will rank all SSPARs recommended for promotion.
In all instances, ranking for promotion provides a recommendation to the President
or designee for action to be taken in the event of inadequate funds. Where SSPARs are
not promoted due to lack of funds, they shall be automatically considered
recommended for promotion and shall be given first priority when funds for

268

promotion next become available.
2. Participants in performance review
a. All second, fourth and sixth year probationary SSPARs, tenured SSPARs eligible for
promotion, and probationary SSPARs applying for early tenure and/or early
promotion. Third and fifth year probationary SSPARs may also be subject to
performance review upon notification by the President or designee.
b. SSPAR supervisor(s)
c. SSPAR Evaluation Committee
d. University Evaluation Committee
e. President or designee
3. Procedures for performance review
The performance review process is composed of a number of steps involving the
accumulation of materials to be evaluated and the determination of recommendations
at various levels of peer and administrative review.
a. SSPARs complete SSPAR Activities Report (SSPAR, AR) and submit these to the
VPSSO (Vice President, Student Services Office).
Prior to the beginning of the review process, the faculty unit employee subject to
review shall be responsible for the identification of materials he/she wishes to be
considered and for the submission of such materials as may be accessible to
him/her. Evaluating committees and administrators shall be responsible for
identifying and providing materials relating to evaluation not provided by the
employee.
b. A specific deadline before the recommendation is made at the first level of
evaluation shall be established by campus policy at which time the Working
Personnel Action File is declared complete with respect to documentation of
performance for the purpose of evaluation. Insertion of material after the date of
this declaration must have the approval of the SSPAR Evaluation Committee and
shall be limited to items that became accessible after this declaration. Material

269

inserted in this fashion shall be returned to the initial evaluator for review,
evaluation and comment before consideration at subsequent levels of review. If,
during the review process, the absence of required evaluation documents is
discovered, the Working Personnel Action File (WPAF) shall be returned to the level
of which the requisite documentation shall have been provided. Such materials shall
be provided in a timely manner.
c. The VPSSO shall assemble the WPAF (which includes the SSPAR, AR) to the SSPAR's
supervisor. The Supervisor shall prepare a performance evaluation, discuss its
contents with the SSPAR, include it in the WPAF, and forward the evaluation to the
VPSSO. The performance evaluation makes recommendation regarding retention,
promotion or tenure decisions. The VPSSO shall forward the WPAF to the SSPAR
Evaluation Committee for review and recommendations.
d. The SSPAR Evaluation Committee shall review the WPAF contents, engage in
deliberations and arrive at recommendations. At its discretion, the committee may
seek additional information. If information is used in the evaluation process, it is
documented and added to the file. At the completion of the process, the committee
shall forward the file to the VPSSO.
e. The VPSSO submits the WPAF to the University Evaluation Committee for review,
recommendations, and rankings in promotion cases.
f. The VPSSO submits the WPAF to the President or designee for decision. The Vice
President for Student Services may serve as both the designee of the President and
the SSPAR supervisor for purposes of reviews and evaluations. In addition to
decisions regarding retention, promotion or tenure, the President or designee may
notify probationary SSPARs that performance review is required in the third or fifth
probationary year. At the completion of the process, the supervisor shall discuss the
results of the retention promotion and tenure review with the employee.
Periodic Evaluation
1. Definitions
a. Periodic Evaluation: Periodic evaluation is the process whereby SSPARs who are not
subject to performance review are evaluated. Those subject to periodic evaluation
include temporary part-time and temporary full-time SSPARs, and first, third and

270

fifth year probationary SSPARs. Third and fifth year SSPARs applying for early tenure
and/or early promotion will be subject to performance review and therefore
periodic evaluation will not be necessary. Periodic evaluation will also not be
necessary for third and fifth year SSPARs subject to performance review as a result
of notification by the President or designee.
b. Purpose of Periodic evaluation. The purpose of periodic evaluation for SSPARs is to
evaluate professional assignments and where applicable, professional growth and
Service to university and/or community. Where necessary, steps may be
recommended to improve performance.
c. Result of Periodic evaluation. The result of periodic evaluation is to be a summary
statement on the strengths and weaknesses of the SSPAR in the areas of
professional assignments, professional growth/activities and Service to university
and/or community. This statement may include recommendations for improvement.
Upon completion, each summary statement is placed in the PAF and a copy is
provided to the SSPAR.
In the case of temporary SSPAR's, the results of periodic evaluation shall be given
careful consideration whenever reappointment is considered. For temporary fulltime SSPARs, it may be used as the basis for recommending movement to a higher
range. Recommendations for movement to a higher range shall only be made in
cases where the temporary full-time SSPAR has reached the top step of a range.
2. Procedures for periodic evaluation
a. Temporary SSPARs
i. Temporary SSPARs completes an Activities Report forms and submit these to
the Vice President, Student Services Office {VPSSO}.
ii. The VPSSO assembles the Working Personnel Action Files (WPAF) consisting
of appropriate evaluations materials, including the current Activities Report,
and forwards it to the SSPAR supervisor.
iii. The SSPAR supervisor prepares an evaluation based on the WPAF, and
forwards it to the VPSSO. The VPSSO forwards the WPAF to the SSPAR
Evaluation Committee.
iv. The SSPAR Evaluation Committee prepares summary evaluations and

271

submits these to the VPSSO.
b. First, Third, and Fifth Year Probationary SSPARs
i. First, third, and fifth year SSPARs complete the Activities Report (SSPAR,AR)
forms and submit these to the Vice President, Student Services Office
(VPSSO).
ii. The VPSSO assembles the Working Personnel Action Files (WPAF) and
forwards it to the SSPAR supervisor.
iii. The SSPAR supervisor prepares an evaluation based on the WPAF and
forwards it to the VPSSO. The VPSSO shall forward that material to the SSPAR
Evaluation Committee.
iv. The SSPAR Evaluation Committee shall prepare a current summary statement
of its evaluation and submit it to the VPSSO. Following the completion of the
review process, recommending parties shall provide an opportunity for
discussion with the SSPAR. This will ensure that the evaluation process is one of
growth, maturation and collegiality.
3. Periodic evaluation of tenured SSPARs
a. Purpose
The purpose of periodic evaluation of tenured SSPARs is to assure continuing quality
services within the University. The program is designed to maintain excellence in
SSPAR performance, professional activity and service to the University and
community. This process is intended to be both positive and support.
b. Procedure
i. Each academic year, tenured SSPARs who are no longer subject to
performance review and who have not been reviewed during the previous
five (5) year period shall be subject to periodic evaluation. Also subject to
periodic evaluation are tenured SSPARs whose previous evaluations resulted
in a decision to review prior to the normal five (5) year period.
ii. During the Fall Quarter of the evaluation year those SSPARs subject to

272

evaluation shall submit to the Vice President, Student Services Office (VPSSO)
an Activities Report. The report shall be cumulative over the previous five
year (5) years or since the last evaluation.
iii. The following materials shall be assembled into a Working Personnel Action
File by the Vice President, Student Services Office.
• SSPAR Activities Report
• Other material deemed relevant by the SSPAR
iv. The SSPAR Evaluation Committee and SSPAR supervisor shall jointly review
the assembled file and prepare a summary report outlining strengths and
weaknesses in the SSPAR performance, specifying remedies if any, and
indicating when the next review shall take place. A copy of this report shall
be given to the SSPAR who shall have the right to submit a written response,
which may be a rebuttal.
v. The Chair of the Evaluation Committee, the SSPAR supervisor and the SSPAR
shall meet to discuss the contents of and any recommendations contained in
the report. The report shall then become a part of the Personnel Action File.
c. Criteria. Tenured SSPARs shall be evaluated in the areas of professional assignment,
professional activities and service to the University and community. The applicable
criteria in evaluating these areas are the same as for SSPARs subject to performance
review.
d. Exclusion. Members of the SSPAR Evaluation Committee shall not participate in their
own review.
e. Delays in review. Although the MOU Section 15.28 is silent on delays in the review
process, the University recognizes that unforeseen emergency situations may arise
so that a delay in review is inevitable. Reasons for a delay must be serious and
compelling. Requests for a delay in review must be made in writing with specific
reasons stated for the delay. These requests must be submitted to the SSPAR
supervisor. Delays of no more than one year may be granted except in exceptional
circumstances, such as a multiple year leave of absence, when more than one year
may be granted, by the SSPAR supervisor in consultation with the SSPAR Evaluation
Committee.

273

Criteria for Performance Review
One of the hallmarks of university excellence is the sound professional balance of its
SSPARs. This balance results from a blend of excellent performance of professional
assignments, active and substantive professional activity, and professional service to the
University and/or community. These criteria shall be applied to all persons seeking
retention, tenure and/or promotion as members of the tenure track faculty.
SSPARs are evaluated in three areas: professional assignments, professional activities,
and service to university and/or community.
1. Performance of professional assignments
The primary function of SSPARs at the California State University is the performance of
professional assignments. The professional environment and work of SSPARs is different
from those of the instructional faculty and librarians because of the special nature of
their assignments. The work of SSPARs is varied and involves a wide range of
professional assignments mostly outside of the classroom, but related to the academic
mission of the University. The factors used in the performance evaluation of SSPARs
must reflect these unique elements and responsibilities.
Direct objective evidence of the effectiveness in performing professional assignments is
crucial to the overall evaluation process. Effectiveness shall be evaluated by the quality
of the performance in the various types of professional assignments. These may include,
but are not limited to, psychological services, and special programs and services for
students with disabilities.
Those persons involved in the evaluation process shall recognize the existence of
differences in the SSPAR assignments. While SSPARs may have a variety of diverse and
wide-ranging responsibilities, SSPARs are expected to work effectively in the
performance of professional assignments. Evaluation shall be based upon the particular
methods used by the SSPAR and whether or not they are likely to produce desired
Results.
The primary sources for evidence concerning the quality of the performance or
professional assignments shall be the SSPAR Activities Report and the SSPAR
Supervisor's Report.
The appropriate supervisor(s) in the Division of Student Services and the University
Evaluation Committee shall evaluate the performance of professional assignments. They

274

shall also determine if it is appropriate to the SSPARs rank.
Quality of performance of professional assignments shall be evaluated in the following
Areas:
a. Commend of professional knowledge. Credentials presented by the SSPAR upon
appointment should attest initially to the SSPAR's command of the professional
knowledge. However, refinement and change are inherent in any area of knowledge.
SSPARs must be familiar with the current knowledge within their areas of expertise
and incorporate relevant changes into professional assignments.
b. Effectiveness in Performance of Professional Assignments.
SSPARs must perform effectively in their areas of responsibility. Effectiveness in
performance is demonstrated by professional competence; completing assignments
competently, thoroughly, and in a timely manner; performing with minimal direction
and supervision; accepting supervision and responding positively to constructive
criticism; displaying appropriate initiative and exercising sound judgment;
demonstrating effectiveness as a supervisor (if the position involves this role); and
demonstrating a thorough working knowledge of the policies and procedures in the
area of responsibility.
SSPARs must perform effectively in their working relationships with students both
individually and in groups within their areas of responsibility. Effectiveness in
performance is demonstrated by receiving favorable evaluations from supervisors,
peers, and students regarding effectiveness; and advising, sponsoring or interacting
with recognized student groups.
SSPARs must perform effectively in using innovative and creative skills, and having
the ability to implement them into productive applications. Effectiveness in
performance is demonstrated by initiating change with due consideration of
appropriateness, consultation and constraints; accepting negotiated change and
assisting in its implementation with the University; and adapting to meet new and
different needs within their field.
SSPARs must perform effectively in ability to work with colleagues. Effectiveness in
performance is demonstrated by showing an active interest and participating in
reconciling differences; showing respect for the opinions of others; sharing
knowledge and skills with colleagues; and establishing and maintaining sound
professional relationships with personnel outside of student services and academic

275

related areas.
2. Professional activities
A certain level of professional activity and growth supports the primary mission of the
University. Continued professional growth provides a means whereby excellent, up-todate and enriched academic related professionals benefit the University as a whole.
Evaluation Committees and others involved in performance review recognize that no
single method exists whereby SSPARs may demonstrate professional growth. Distinct
professional areas assigned to the SSPAR have diverse methods of demonstrating
professional growth. Even within the same assignment differences among professional
training, presentations, on-going study and classroom instruction exist.
a. It shall be the sole responsibility of the SSPAR to provide documented evidence of
professional activity. Examples of items which may be used are books and articles or
evidence indicating their acceptance for publication, proposals, contracts, grants or
programs; letters of invitation or appointment, reviews of creative activity written
by professionally recognized persons; other appropriate professionally generated
materials pertinent to this area of evaluation. This evidence shall be submitted as
part of the SSPAR Activities Report.
b. The SSPAR Supervisor/Evaluation Committee must evaluate each item in the area of
professional growth. It must also address the significance of the contribution and
the quality of the form in which it is presented, i.e. a publication, a paper or
presentation, a work in progress, etc. In addition, if the contribution consists of
professional activity such as a consultant ship, participation in professional
organization, or grant and award, the committee must assess its significance and
clarify the relevance of the format. lf the SSPAR Supervisor/Evaluation committee
finds any deficiencies in the SSPAR's description of professional growth or has
difficulty commenting on any item in the report, the committee shall consult with
the SSPAR before preparing an evaluation.
c. The SSPAR Supervisor/Evaluation Committees shall consider all professional activity
materials submitted by the SSPAR. The SSPAR Supervisor/Evaluation Committee
shall determine the appropriateness and quality of the professional activities in light
of established criteria. The Supervisor/Evaluation shall evaluate the SSPAR's
professional growth relative to the SSPAR's academic rank.
d. The following list of professional activities should be regarded as exemplary in
nature and is not meant to be limiting, definitive or prescriptive in its order.

276

Professionally evaluated work is generally more significant. Some parts of this list
are more readily adapted to specific academic areas than others.
i. Receipt of a fellowship, grant, contract, award, prize or other indication of
professional recognition.
ii. Active participation in seminars, conferences, meetings or other activity
leading to professional growth.
iii. Continuing education, retraining, and the development of new skills to one's
current or potential assignment. Evidence of these activities may be taking of
courses, earning advanced degrees, or participating in professional
conferences, seminars, workshops, institutes, or special programs which lead
to systematic updating of knowledge; and consideration of new ideas and
information from colleagues and students, and the application of the new
ideas and information.
iv. Presentations at professional meetings dealing with research, investigative
activity or creative activity.
v. Publications, such as books or texts (whole or part thereof), journal
periodical or any other type of academically specialized form such as music,
script, software, etc. Professionally recognized or refereed publications are
generally more significant.
vi. Creative activity culminating in a public display or performance such as might
occur in music, art, drama, poetry reading, etc.
vii. Active leadership and/or service in recognized professional societies. (This
activity may also be relevant to Service to university.)
viii. Consultant ships, whether paid or unpaid, of a professional nature.
ix. Editing, reviewing indexing, abstracting, or performing other editorial work
for professional or scholarly publications.
x. Involvement in an on-going study or research program within a related
discipline; publication of pertinent studies and research projects; and
supporting the study and research of others.

277

xi. Involvement in classroom instruction; demonstration of teaching skills with
groups of students or colleagues; receiving feedback on improving teaching
methods and procedures; and receiving evaluation and constructive criticism
by both students and peers.
xii. Any other item of specific professional activity, such as work in progress,
research related to assignment, etc.
3. Service to university and/or community
In addition to demonstrated effectiveness in performance of professional assignments
and continued professional activity, SSPARs must also participate in professionally
related service to the University and/or community.
Service to university and/or community SSPARs are uniquely qualified to contribute to
the mission of the University in a variety of ways, such as participating in institutional
governance, evaluating the professional performance of their colleagues, sponsoring
student organizations, etc. Service community related to the mission of the University
brings recognition not only to the University but to the SSPARs as well. Service should be
consistent with the professional abilities, expertise and leadership qualities of the SSPAR
and should foster an intellectual relationship with the off-campus community. The term
"community" may refer to local, regional, state, national or international entities.
Service to the University and/or community shall be demonstrated by documented
evidence submitted with the SSPAR Activities Report. The following list provides
examples only and must not be construed as limiting, definitive or prescriptive in its
Order.
a. Active participation in service to and/or governance of the SSPAR's department, the
campus and/or University System.
b. Active participation at all levels of the University and the University System with
emphasis on the department and the division levels while at the SSPAR I rank.
c. Authorship of documents, reports, or other materials pertinent to the University's
mission or operation.
d. Advisor or sponsor to student groups on campus.
e. Active participation in program, Department, Division campus and/or University-

278

wide Advisory Groups.
f. Specialized service, either elected or appointed. If a SSPAR is given release time to
perform such a service, this shall not be considered in evaluating the quality of such
service. However, having received released time may be considered when evaluating
the quantity of such service.
g. Lectures, speeches, talks, presentations and/or displays given to schools, community
groups, or the University community.
h. Consultant ships to service community groups.
i. Services at local, state and Federal Government level.
j. Active participation and/or office holding in civic, educational, service, or
humanitarian groups.
k. Judge at science fairs, art shows, music contests, etc., educational marathons,
officiating at sporting events, or similar activity.
I. Media presentations such as interviews, articles, speeches, or other presentations in
newspapers, magazines, radio, television, or film.
m. Participation in educational equity programs and activities.
n. Other items related to Service to university and/or community.
Service to university and/or community. The SSPAR shall describe and provide
documentation for Service to university and/or community. Evidence may include, but
shall not be limited to, letters of invitation, memoranda documenting service, programs,
membership lists, and other appropriate items. This evidence shall be attached to the
SSPAR Activities Report.
The SSPAR supervisor(s) and the University Evaluation Committees shall evaluate the
nature of the service to the University and/or community. They shall also determine if it
is appropriate to the SSPAR's rank.
Rating System for and its Application to Performance Review

279

The SSPAR supervisor(s) and University Evaluation Committees shall apply the
established
criteria to the performance of an SSPAR relative to that SSPAR's academic rank. The
following ratings shall be used:
Superior. This rating reflects exceptional performance in an area of evaluation.
Competent. This rating reflects satisfactory performance in an area of evaluation.
Inadequate. This rating clearly indicates unacceptable performance in an area of
evaluation.
1. General provisions
a. To be reappointed for the third, fourth, fifth, and sixth years of the probationary
period, the SSPAR must be judged at least COMPETENT in professional assignments,
professional growth, and service at current rank.
b. To be promoted, the SSPAR must be judged SUPERIOR in professional assignments,
professional growth, or service at the level of the academic rank to which promotion
is sought. A rating of at least COMPETENT must be received in each of the other two
areas.
c. To be awarded tenure, the SSPAR must be judged at the level at which he or she was
appointed to the tenure track and be found SUPERIOR in professional assignments,
professional growth, or service and at least COMPETENT in the other two areas.
d. SSPARs requesting early promotion are judged by the same standards according to
rank as SSPARs considered at the end of the normal probationary period.
e. SSPARs requesting early tenure shall meet the same standards according to rank as
SSPARs considered at the end of the normal probationary period. In addition,
SSPARs requesting early tenure shall have demonstrated a sustained record of
involvement and achievement, on this campus or elsewhere, indicative of a
commitment to continued professional performance in professional assignment,
professional growth and service to the University.
f. Since the criteria for early promotion and early tenure are not identical, an SSPAR
may be granted promotion, tenure, or both promotion and tenure.
G. In progressing through the levels of SSPAR I, II and Ill, an increasingly rigorous

280

application of the criteria for SUPERIOR shall be applied.
2. Competency and superiority in the area of professional assignments
a. At the rank of SSPAR I : During years two and three of the probationary period, the
COMPETENT SSPAR at the rank of SSPAR I must demonstrate command of
professional knowledge. Strong indications of developing abilities must be
demonstrated in the other professional assignment criteria.
During subsequent years, competence in the appropriate professional assignments
criteria must be evident.
b. At the rank of SSPAR II: The COMPETENT SSPAR at the rank of SSPAR II must
demonstrate proficiency in the appropriate professional assignments criteria.
c. At the rank of SSPAR Ill: The COMPETENT SSPAR at the rank of SSPAR 111 must
demonstrate proficiency in the appropriate professional assignments criteria and
demonstrate a record of involvement and achievement indicative of a commitment
to continue professional performance of professional assignments.
d. Superiority in the Area of Professional Assignments: To be considered SUPERIOR in
the area of professional assignments, the SSPAR must meet the requirements set
forth above for COMPETENT appropriate to rank. In addition to this, the SSPAR must
meet at least one of the following additional criteria:
i. A preponderance of evidence demonstrating excellence in professional
assignments as indicated in the SSPAR Activities Report.
ii. A record of distinction for some aspect of professional assignments at or
beyond the University.
3. Competency and superiority in the area of professional activities
a. At the rank of SSPAR I: During years two and three of the probationary period, the
COMPETENT SSPAR at the rank of SSPAR I must demonstrate involvement in
professional activities. In subsequent years, continued active involvement in and
successful completion of professional activities should be evident (see Chapter 4,
Section 11.B.4. for examples of professional activities).
b. At the rank of SSPAR II: The COMPETENT SSPAR at the rank of SSPAR II must
demonstrate a record of active involvement in and successful accomplishment of
professional activities. Successful accomplishment at this level normally requires
that some complete work be professionally evaluated (see Chapter 4, Section 11.B.4.
for examples of professional activities).
c. At the rank of SSPAR Ill: The COMPETENT SSPAR at the rank of SSPAR Ill must
demonstrate a record of successful accomplishment and recognition in professional

281

activities (see Chapter 4, Section 11.B.4. for examples of professional activities).
d. Superiority in the Area of Professional Growth: To be considered SUPERIOR in the
area of professional growth the SSPAR must meet the requirement set forth above
for COMPETENT appropriate to rank. In addition to this, the SSPAR must also have
attained recognition beyond the University in research, investigative activity and/or
creative activity.
4. Competency and superiority in the area of service to university and/or community
a. At the rank of SSPAR I: The COMPETENT SSPAR should demonstrate a developing
level of participation particularly at the department and division levels within the
area of service. (See Chapter 4, Section 11.C.l. for examples of service activities.) For
the purpose of awarding tenure, the COMPETENT SSPAR must demonstrate
significant participation in the area of service.
b. At the rank of SSPAR iii: The COMPETENT SSPAR at this rank must demonstrate
significant participation in the area of service. (See Chapter 4, Section 11.C.l. for
examples of service activities.) For a SSPAR hired at this rank, a COMPETENT rating
may be assigned for demonstrating sufficient progress towards achieving this
standard by their third probationary year.
c. At the rank of SSPAR Ill: In addition to significant participation in service activities,
the COMPETENT SSP.AR is expected to provide effective leadership in some of these
activities. (See Chapter 4, Section 11.C.l. for examples of service activities.) For a
SSPAR hired at this rank, a COMPETENT rating may be assigned for demonstrating
sufficient progress towards achieving this standard by their third probationary year.
21
FAM 652.3; 2020
Evaluation of SSPARs
d. Superiority in the Area of Service: A rating of SUPERIOR in this area is awarded for
exceptional service that has been clearly documented as to quantity and quality. To
be considered SUPERIOR in the area of service, the SSPAR must meet the
qualifications set forth above for COMPETENT appropriate to academic rank. In
addition, the SSPAR must demonstrate unusual effectiveness or performance as a
contributor or leader in the University, the off-campus community, or a combination
of both.
Criteria for Periodic evaluation
1. Temporary full-time SSPARs
Temporary full-time SSPARs shall be evaluated in the areas of professional assignments,

282

professional growth, and service to the University and/or community, as specified in
their contracts. The applicable criteria are the same as for SSPARs subject to
performance review.
To be recommended for movement to a higher range, temporary full-time SSPARs shall
maintain a rating of SUPERIOR in professional assignments and a rating of at least
COMPETENT in the applicable criterion area(s) as specified in their contracts.
2. Temporary part-time SSPARs
Temporary part-time SSPARs shall only be evaluated in the area of professional
assignments. The applicable criteria in evaluating this area are the same as for SSPARs
subject to performance review.
To be reappointed, the temporary part-time SSPAR must be judged COMPETENT in
professional assignments.
3. First, third and fifth year probationary SSPARs
First, Third and Fifth year probationary SSPARs shall be evaluated in the area of
professional assignments, professional growth, and service to the University and/or
community. The applicable criteria in evaluating those areas are the same as for SSPARs
subject to performance review.

FAM 652.4 EVALUATION OF LIBRARY FACULTY
FAM 652.4 - Evaluation of Library Faculty.pdf

Purpose and Scope
The purpose of evaluation is to develop and maintain high quality faculty who are intellectually
and professionally active. The goal of evaluation is to ensure the protection of faculty, student,
and institutional interests.
This policy governs all aspects of evaluation of the university's library faculty. Procedures
contained in this document are in accordance with the Collective Bargaining Agreement (CBA).
In cases where disagreement occurs between this policy and the CBA, the CBA shall prevail.
Policy statement

283

Peer judgment is vital to any evaluation process designed to maintain high academic standards.
Peer evaluation occurs at the Library and the University level. In addition, evaluation includes
administrative review.
The CBA uses the term "Faculty Unit Employees" to refer to all persons in Bargaining Unit 3. In
this policy, the term "faculty" shall refer to all faculty unit employees who are librarians.
The acronym FAD is used in this policy to refer to Faculty Affairs and Development.
Overview
1. Types of evaluation
There are two types of evaluation. First is performance review, which is applicable to all
probationary faculty members for purposes of determining retention, tenure, and/or
promotion.
Performance review is also applicable to tenured Senior Assistant and Associate Librarians
requesting consideration for promotion. The second type of evaluation is formative review,
which is applicable to all faculty members not subject to performance evaluation.
General provisions of evaluation: Several general provisions apply to both performance review
and periodic evaluation.
a. Only tenured faculty members and academic administrators may engage in
deliberations and make recommendations regarding the evaluation of other faculty
members. Evaluation criteria and procedures shall be available to faculty members
before the evaluation process begins. No changes in such criteria or procedures may be
made during the evaluation process.
b. At all levels of review, before recommendations are forwarded to the next evaluation
level, faculty members shall be given a copy of each recommendation stating in writing
the reasons for the recommendation. Faculty members have the right to respond or
submit a rebuttal within ten working days following the date that the receipt was
signed. A copy of the response or rebuttal statement shall accompany the Working
Personnel Action File (WPAF} and shall also be sent to any previous levels of review.
Upon request, the faculty member may be provided an opportunity to discuss the
recommendation with the recommending party.
This provision shall not require that evaluation timelines be altered.
c. Personnel recommendations or decisions relating to retention, tenure, promotion,
termination, or any other personnel action shall be based primarily on material
contained in the Personnel Action File (PAF}. If a personnel recommendation or decision

284

is based on reasons not contained in the P AF, the party making the recommendation or
decision shall commit those reasons to writing and this signed statement shall be placed
in the PAF and a copy provided to the faculty member.
d. In cases of promotion, only those members of the Library Evaluation Committee with
a higher rank than the applicant(s} may participate in the evaluation. The applicant may
either give consent for the review to proceed with the remaining two members or may
request the vacancy be filled by a qualified third person. See Section 4.a., below, for this
procedure.
e. Recommendations shall be confidential except that the affected faculty member, the
designated administrators, the President, and the peer review committee members
shall
have access to written recommendations.
f. Timetables for performance review and periodic evaluation are prepared at the
beginning of each academic year by the FAD Office and submitted to the Faculty
Senate for approval.
2. Library evaluator: Selection and Function
a. Selection: The Library Evaluator shall hold the rank of Librarian and be elected for a 2year term. In the event that the current Library Evaluator is presently up for an
evaluation, a substitute Library Evaluator will be chosen for the purpose of this one
review by election among all librarians.
b. Function: since there are no department chairs or their equivalent in the Pfau Library,
the Library Evaluator is the first level of review for all evaluations.
3. Evaluation Committees: Composition and Functions
a. Library Evaluation Committee
Composition: The Library Evaluation Committee shall be composed of three tenured,
elected members, two of whom must be at the rank of Librarian and the third, Associate
Librarian or Librarian. The committee shall elect a chair who shall hold the rank of
Librarian. The Library Evaluator may not serve on this committee. No member of this
committee can concurrently serve on the University Evaluation Committee. No one who
is presently up for review, evaluation, and/or promotion may serve on the committee.
In the event that one of the committee members must withdraw for this reason, that

285

person has the option to agree to a review by the remaining two members. Otherwise, a
third member may be selected using one of the methods stated below.
Annually, the Librarians' Council shall nominate and elect committee members from
within the library. Should it become necessary in order to keep all three positions filled,
the nominations and elections may take place more frequently. In the event of
insufficient eligible/willing members to serve on the Library Evaluation Committee, the
Librarians' Council shall either invite a faculty member of appropriate rank from outside
the library who is acceptable to all the members to serve or nominate and elect faculty
members from outside the library by assembling a panel of eligible members from
among whom the necessary members shall be chosen.
Functions: This committee shall conduct performance reviews as well as periodic
evaluations.
b. University Evaluation Committee
Composition: The University Evaluation Committee shall be composed of one tenured
Professor elected from each College by the tenure-track faculty of the College: one
tenured Librarian elected by the tenure-track library faculty; and one tenured Student
Services Professional, Academic- Related (SSP, AR) or alternate elected by the tenuretrack SSP, ARs. Department Chairs or Associate Deans may not serve on this committee.
Library Evaluators may not serve on this committee.
Members shall serve two-year staggered terms. The committee shall elect a chair. A
member of this committee cannot serve concurrently as a member of any evaluation
committee at a lower level.
Functions: This committee shall conduct performance reviews for faculty members at
the University level in cases where recommendations from the Department,
Department Chair, College and Dean are not unanimous as well as in cases involving
non-retention, and denial of tenure or denial of promotion. This committee shall also
serve as the higher- level peer review committee for librarians and SSP, ARs. In addition,
the committee shall rank faculty in promotion cases, basing their rankings primarily on
previous recommendations and rankings. This committee shall also conduct
performance reviews in any case at the request of the President or designee.
4. Instruments of Evaluation

286

a. Faculty Activities Reports (FARs)
F ARs shall be submitted by all faculty members subject to performance review and by
probationary and full-time temporary faculty members subject to periodic evaluation.
These shall cover all three areas of evaluation: professional assignment, research,
scholarly, or creative activities, service to university and/or community.
The FAR should cover the following periods of time:
i. For all probationary faculty being considered for retention or tenure, the FAR
should be cumulative since appointment.
ii. For tenured faculty applying for promotion, the FAR should be cumulative
since submission of the last FAR.
iii. For all others (e.g., tenured faculty subject to periodic evaluation and full-time
temporary faculty), the FAR should be cumulative since submission of the last
FAR.
b. Supporting documentation
Supporting documentation for activities must be attached to this report (for example,
reprints of publications, appropriate evidence regarding speeches, consultations,
performances, exhibitions, work in progress, etc.) as follows:
i. For probationary faculty being considered for retention, all supporting
documentation should be cumulative since appointment.
ii. For probationary faculty being considered for tenure and/or promotion, all
supporting documentation should be cumulative since appointment.
iii. For tenured faculty applying for promotion, all supporting documentation
since submission of the last FAR.
iv. For all others (e.g., tenured faculty subject to periodic evaluation and full-time
temporary faculty), all supporting documentation since the last FAR was
submitted.
Faculty members may include professional activities carried out prior to appointment.
Pre- employment dates of such activities should be noted. The entire professional
experience of the faculty member should be examined and considered, but primary
consideration shall be given to the professional accomplishments during the appropriate
time period as indicated above.
All FARs must be accompanied by an Index of Attachments.

287

When a faculty member reports collaborative research, scholarly, or creative activities
or
accomplishments, a Joint Activities Report form should be submitted with the FAR for
each joint activity.
c. Library Evaluator's Report
A Library Evaluator's Report shall be completed for each faculty member subject to
performance review or periodic evaluation. This report shall be completed after the
appropriate FAR is submitted to the Library Administration Office (LAO) and before the
Library Evaluation Committee and the Library Dean review the FAR. The report makes
no
recommendation regarding performance review or periodic evaluation retention,
promotion, or tenure decisions. The faculty member shall receive a copy of the report
from the Library Evaluator and meet with the Library Evaluator to review it (if desired).
Any agreed-upon changes shall be incorporated into the final report submitted to the
LAO. If there are any further changes or disputes, the faculty member may submit a
written response or rebuttal within ten days following its receipt for consideration in the
current evaluation cycle. This statement shall be included in the PAF.
5. Files
a. The Personnel Action File (P AF)
i. A PAF shall be maintained for each faculty member. PAFs are kept at the LAO.
ii. A faculty member shall have the right to submit additional materials to his/her
PAF and shall have the right to submit a written rebuttal to any material in
his/her file. Only material identified by source may be placed in the PAF.
Identification shall indicate the author, the committee, the campus office, or the
name of the officially authorized body generating the material. The faculty
member shall be provided with a copy of any material to be placed in the P AF at
least five days prior to the placement.
iii. A faculty member shall have the right of access to all material in his/her PAF,
exclusive of pre-employment materials, except when the pre-employment
materials are used in personnel actions.
1v. The PAF may be inspected by the faculty member upon request to the
appropriate office. A copy of all materials requested shall be provided within
fourteen days of the request. If the faculty member believes that any portion of

288

the file is not accurate, a correction or deletion of those materials may be
requested. If the request is denied, the faculty member shall have seven days to
submit the request to the President.
Within twenty-one days of the request to the President, the President shall
provide to the faculty member a written response. If the President or designee
grants the request, the record shall be corrected or the deletions made, and the
faculty member shall be sent a written statement to that effect. If the President
or designee denies the request, the response shall include the reason(s) for
denial.
v. The PAF shall be held in confidence. Access to a faculty member's file shall be
limited to persons with official business. The appropriate office shall log all
instances of access to a PAF. This record shall be a part of the file.
b. Working Personnel Action File (WPAF)
The WP AF refers to the portion of the Personnel Action File used during the
time of performance review or periodic evaluation of a faculty member. The
WPAF shall include where required the following:
i. A FAR (and the Index of Attachments to the FAR) reflecting the cumulative
record in all areas of evaluation.
ii. Library Evaluator's reports.
iii. Responses and rebuttals.
iv. Faculty authored reports from sabbatical leaves, difference-in-pay leaves,
mini
grants, and other internal CSUSB grants.
v. All other evaluation materials appropriately included in the PAF.
vi. All current and previous summary statements and recommendations resulting
from the evaluation process. Materials submitted to the WPAF by a faculty
member for evaluation purposes shall be deemed incorporated by reference in
the P AF but need not be physically placed in the file. An index of such materials
shall be prepared by the faculty member and submitted with the materials. Such
an index shall be permanently placed in the PAF.

289

WPAFs for all librarians shall be housed in the LAO unless they are currently
being reviewed by the University Evaluation Committee, in which case the FAD
Office shall temporarily house them. All others shall be housed in the FAD Office.
c. Recommendations
Recommendations shall be made following a thorough review of the WP AF relative to
each applicable criterion. All participants who make recommendations shall, in addition,
ensure that criteria are applied equally for each faculty member evaluated. If there are
omissions of documentation, information or recommendations in the materials
submitted for review, the materials may be returned for amplification. Any such
amplification shall be provided in a timely manner.
d. Decision
The President or designee shall receive the WPAF, review its contents and
recommendations, and reach a decision. The President's or designee's decision shall be
communicated in writing to the faculty member and shall state the reasons for the
decision.
Performance Review
1. Definitions
a. Performance Review: Performance review is the process whereby decisions
concerning retention, promotion, and tenure are made. Performance reviews are based
upon information obtained from peers and administrators in the manner described in
this document. Upon completion of deliberations at each level of performance review, a
copy of the recommendation shall be forwarded to the faculty member, who may
respond in writing within 10 days after receipt of the recommendation and/or request a
meeting with the recommending party.
b. Probation: The normal period of probation shall be six years of credited service or
full-time probationary service. A year of service for a faculty member in an academic
year position is two semesters of employment within an academic year.
Any deviation from the normal six-year probationary period shall be the decision of the
President or designee, following consideration of recommendations from the Library
Evaluation Committee, Library Dean, and the University Evaluation Committee, if

290

Applicable.
A probationary faculty member in the second year of service shall be notified by the
President or designee of a final decision on retention no later than February 15. A
probationary faculty member who has served more than two years of probation shall be
notified by the President or designee of a final decision on retention or a terminal year
appointment no later than June 1.
c. Tenure: Tenure is the right of a faculty member to continue permanent employment
at the campus except when such employment is voluntarily terminated or terminated
by the employer pursuant to the provisions of a collective bargaining agreement or law.
The President or designee may award tenure to a faculty member after a six-year
probationary period. Upon application by a candidate and consideration of positive
recommendations from evaluation committees and the Library Dean, the President or
designee may award tenure before the end of the six-year probationary period. Tenure
shall be effctive at the beginning of the academic year succeeding the year in which
tenure is awarded.
d. Promotion: Promotion is the advancement to a higher rank of a probationary or
tenured faculty member. A probationary faculty member shall not normally be
promoted during probation. A probationary faculty member shall normally be
considered for promotion at the same time he/she is considered for tenure.
Probationary faculty members shall not be promoted beyond the rank of Associate
Librarian. Upon application by the candidate and following consideration of positive
recommendations from evaluation committees and the Library Dean, probationary
faculty members may be promoted to the rank of Associate Librarian. Promotion of a
tenured faculty member shall normally be considered during his/her fifth year of service
in the same rank. Upon application and following consideration of positive
recommendations from the evaluation committees and the Library Dean, a tenured
faculty member may be promoted to the rank of Associate Librarian or Librarian prior to
the fifth year of service in the same rank.
The President or designee shall notify the faculty member in writing of the final decision
on promotion no later than June 15. Such notification shall include the reasons for
approval or denial and shall indicate the effective date of the promotion.
2. Participants in Performance Review
a. Faculty Members: Performance review applies to all second-, fourth- and sixth-year
probationary faculty members, tenured faculty members applying for promotion, and

291

probationary faculty members applying for early tenure and/or early promotion. Thirdand fifth-year probationary faculty members may also be subject to performance review
upon notification by the President or designee.
b. Library Evaluator
c. Library Evaluation Committee
d. Library Dean
e. University Evaluation Committee
f. President or Designee
3. Procedures for Performance Review
The performance review process is composed of a number of steps involving the
accumulation of materials to be evaluated and the determination of recommendations
at various levels of peer and administrative review. Procedures governing performance
review for faculty members:
a. Faculty member completes the FAR and submit it to the LAO. The LAO assembles the
WPAF, then notifies the Library Evaluator that the WPAF is ready for review.
Prior to the beginning of the review process, the faculty unit employee subject to review
shall be responsible for the identification of materials he/she wishes to be considered
and for the submission of such materials as may be accessible to him/her.
Evaluating committees and administrators shall be responsible for identifying and
providing materials relating to evaluation not provided by the employee.
A specific deadline before the recommendation is made at the first level of evaluation
shall be established by campus policy at which time the WPAF is declared complete with
respect to documentation of performance for the purpose of evaluation. Insertion of
material ,after the date of this declaration must have the approval of the Library
Evaluation Committee and shall be limited to items that became accessible after this
declaration. Material inserted in this fashion shall be returned to the Library Evaluator
for review, evaluation, and comment before consideration at subsequent levels of
review. If, during the review process, the absence of required evaluation documents is
discovered, the WP AF shall be returned to the level at which the requisite
documentation shall have been provided. Such materials shall be provided in a timely
manner.
b. Library Evaluator shall complete the Library Evaluator's Report before the Library
Evaluation Committee and the Library Dean review the WPAF. The report makes no
recommendations regarding performance review or periodic evaluation retention,

292

promotion, or tenure decisions. The faculty member shall receive a copy of the report
from the Library Evaluator and meet with the Library Evaluator (if desired) to review it.
Any agreed-upon changes shall be incorporated into the final report submitted to the
LAO. If there are any further changes or disputes, the faculty member may submit a
written response or rebuttal within ten days following its receipt for consideration in the
current evaluation cycle. This statement shall be included in the PAF. The LAO adds the
Evaluator's report to the WPAF. The LAO then notifies the Library Evaluation
Committee that the WPAF is ready for review.
c. The Library Evaluation Committee reviews the WP AF and prepares a report consisting
of their recommendations and ratings. This report is submitted to the LAO. The LAO
adds this report to the WPAF and sends a copy to the faculty member. The faculty
member may submit a written response or rebuttal within ten days following its receipt
for consideration in the current evaluation cycle. The LAO then notifies the Library Dean
that the WPAF is ready for review.
d. The Library Dean reviews the WP AF and prepares a report consisting of
recommendations and ratings. This report is submitted to the LAO. The LAO adds this
report to the WP AF and sends a copy to the faculty member. The faculty member may
submit a written response or rebuttal within ten days following its receipt for
consideration in the current evaluation cycle.
e. The LAO submits the WPAF to the FAD Office. The FAD Office then notifies the
University Evaluation Committee that the WP AF is ready for review, recommendations,
and rankings in promotion cases. The University Evaluation Committee prepares a
report which is added to the WP AF by the APO and sends a copy to the faculty member.
The faculty member may submit a written response or rebuttal within ten days
following its receipt for consideration in the current evaluation cycle.
f. The APO, in coordination with the LAO, submits the WP AF to the President or
designee for decision. In addition to decisions regarding retention, promotion or tenure,
the President or designee may notify probationary faculty members that performance
review is required in the third or fifth probationary year.
Periodic Evaluation
1. Definitions

293

a. Periodic Evaluation. Periodic evaluation is the process whereby faculty members who
are not subject to performance review are evaluated. Those subject to periodic
evaluation includes temporary part-time and temporary full-time faculty members, and
first-, third- and fifth-year probationary faculty members, and tenured faculty members.
Third- and fifth-year faculty members applying for early tenure and/or early promotion
will be subject to performance review and therefore periodic evaluation will not be
necessary. Periodic evaluation will also not be necessary for third- and fifth year faculty
members subject to performance review as a result of notification by the President or
designee.
b. Purpose of periodic evaluation: The purpose of periodic evaluation for faculty is to
evaluate professional assignments, research, scholarly, or creative activities, and service
to university and/or community. Where necessary, steps may be recommended to
improve performance.
c. Result of Periodic Evaluation: The result of periodic evaluation is to be a summary
statement on the strengths and weaknesses of the faculty member in the areas of
professional assignments, professional growth/activities, and service to university
and/or community. This statement may include recommendations for improvement.
Upon completion, each summary statement is placed in the PAF and a copy is provided
to the faculty member.
The results of periodic evaluation shall be given careful consideration whenever a
subsequent appointment for temporary faculty is considered.
2. Procedures for Periodic Evaluation
a. Temporary Full-Time Faculty
i. Temporary full-time faculty members submit F ARs to the LAO.
ii. The LAO assembles the WPAF.
iii. The Library Evaluator, the Library Evaluation Committee, and the Library Dean
shall consecutively review the WPAF, and prepare reports as described above in
Section 3 of, Steps b-d.
b. Temporary Part-Time Faculty.
The LAO assembles WP AFs consisting of summary statements from the Library
Evaluator, the Library Evaluation Committee, and any other appropriate evaluation
materials, for review by the Library Dean.
c. Schedule for Periodic Evaluation of Temporary Full-Time and Part-Time Faculty.

294

Temporary part-time·faculty members appointed for one semester or less, within an
academic year, shall be evaluated at the discretion of the Library Dean or appropriate
supervisor. The temporary part-time faculty member can request that an evaluation be
performed. Temporary faculty members appointed for more than two semesters within
an academic year shall receive a periodic evaluation by the end of the spring semester.
d. First-, Third-, and Fifth-Year Probationary Faculty and Tenured Faculty
i. First-, third-, and fifth-year probationary faculty complete F ARs and submit
them to the LAO. The LAO assembles the WPAF, then notifies the Library
Evaluator that the WP AF is ready for review.
iv. The Library Evaluator reviews the WP AF, writes a report (see INSTRUMENTS
OF EVALUATION, 3 above for details) and submits it to the LAO. The LAO adds
the
Evaluator's report to the WPAF. The Library Administration Office notifies the
Library Evaluation Committee that the WPAF is ready for review.
v. The Library Evaluation Committee reviews the WPAF and prepares a report
consisting of summary statements of their evaluations (no recommendations).
These reports are submitted to the LAO. The LAO adds these reports to the
WPAF. The LAO notifies the Library Dean that the WPAF is ready for review.
vi. The Library Dean reviews the WP AF and submits a report to the LAO and
adds
it to the WPAF. Tenured Faculty: See Below: Periodic evaluation of Tenured
Faculty
Criteria for Performance Review
Areas of evaluation
a. Performance of professional assignments
The primary function of library faculty at the California State University is the
performance of professional assignments. The professional environment, work, and
work hours of library faculty are different from those of the instructional faculty
because of the special nature of libraries, which are cooperative and sequential
enterprises involving interdependent functions and departments. In addition, the work
of librarians requires the application of knowledge and abilities unique to the profession

295

of librarianship. The factors used in the performance evaluation of librarians must
reflect these unique elements and responsibilities.
Direct objective evidence of the effectiveness in performing professional assignments is
crucial to the overall evaluation process. Effectiveness shall be evaluated by the quality
of the performance in the various types of professional assignments. These may include,
but are not limited to, acquisition services, cataloging services, reference services,
circulation services, collection development, periodical services, online reference
services, library automation, and general library instruction and specialized lectures in
assigned areas. A librarian may serve within two or more areas, be responsible for a
particular area of activity or a unit or may be a specialist. Those persons involved in the
evaluation process shall recognize the existence of differences in styles of librarianship.
While no single style or manner of librarianship can be established as best for all
librarians or assignments, librarians are expected to work effectively in the performance
of professional assignments. Evaluation shall be based upon the particular methods
used by the librarian and whether or not they are likely to produce the desired results.
Primary sources for evidence concerning the quality of the performance of professional
assignments shall be the FAR and the Library Evaluator's report.
The Library and University Evaluation Committees as well as the Library Dean shall
evaluate the performance of professional assignments. They shall also determine if such
performance is appropriate to the faculty member's rank.
Quality of performance of professional assignments shall be evaluated in the following
Areas:
i. Command of Professional Knowledge.
Credentials presented by a librarian upon appointment should attest initially to the
librarian's command of the professional knowledge. However, refinement and
change are inherent in any area of knowledge. Librarians must be familiar with the
current knowledge within librarianship and should also incorporate relevant
changes into their professional assignments.
ii. Effectiveness in Performance of Professional Assignments.
Librarians must effectively use their professional knowledge. Effectiveness in
performance of professional assignments is demonstrated by the degree of proficiency
employed, the level of independence demonstrated, the initiative and/or innovation
shown, and the versatility, when appropriate, to work effectively in a variety of library
functions and/or subject areas. Among the items which may be used to evaluate
performance in this area are the adaptation of procedures or policies to reflect changes
in librarianship, in the library itself, or in the University; the introduction of procedures

296

or policies which improve the quality of library service; and/or the strong execution of
basic professional duties.
iii. Oversight, When Appropriate, of Programs and Staff A librarian may be responsible
for overseeing operation of a particular library area of activity or unit and its related
staff. Among the items which shall be used to evaluate performance in this area are: the
establishment of goals and objectives, as well as their documentation and
implementation; the recommendation, interpretation and execution of library policies;
the recommendation of budget and staff allocations; the monitoring of the use of funds
and staff; the planning, organization, and coordination of personnel and procedures; the
delegation of authority; the evaluation of other librarians and support staff; and the
participation in overall library planning and development activities.
iv. Performance, When Appropriate, as a Non-Supervisory Specialist A librarian may be
assigned to an area of activity as a non-supervisory specialist. Among the items used to
evaluate performance in this area are intensive knowledge of a particular area or
activity beyond the criteria established in this document.
b. Research, scholarly, or creative contributions
A certain level of research, scholarly, or creative activities and growth supports the
primary mission of the University. Continued research, scholarly, or creative activities
provide a means whereby excellent, up-to- date and enriched librarianship benefits the
University as a whole. Evaluation committees and others involved in performance
review recognize that no single method exists whereby librarians may demonstrate
research, scholarly, or creative activities. Distinct areas of librarianship have diverse
methods of demonstrating research, scholarly, or creative activities. Even within the
same assignment, differences among research, investigative work, and creative activity
exist.
i. It shall be the sole responsibility of the faculty member to provide documented
evidence of professional growth referenced in the FAR. Examples of items which
may be used are books and articles or evidence indicating their acceptance for
publication, proposals, contracts, grants or program materials; letters of invitation
or appointment, reviews of creative activity generated by professionally recognized
persons; and other appropriate professionally generated materials pertinent to this
area of evaluation. This evidence shall be submitted as part of the FAR.
ii. The faculty member may consult with the Library Evaluator to ascertain that the
FAR contains a thorough description of the faculty member's professional activities

297

and reflects a true picture of research, scholarly, or creative activities.
iii. A request for external review of professional activities materials submitted by a
faculty member may be initiated at any level of review by any party to the review.
Such a request shall document (1) the special circumstances which necessitate an
outside reviewer, and (2) the nature of the materials needing the evaluation of an
external reviewer. The request must be approved by the President or designee with
the concurrence of the faculty member. When the request to submit materials to an
external review has been approved, the faculty member shall be asked to provide to
the APO a list of names from which one or more evaluators may be chosen. The
Library Evaluator, Library Evaluation Committee, and/or Library Dean shall
consider this list and, if appropriate, provide additional names to it. FAD Office will
coordinate the selection of one or more suitable evaluators solely from this list and
in agreement with the faculty member involved.
iv. The following guidelines shall apply in selecting external evaluators:
• Evaluators shall not be a collaborator or a co-author of any publication or
research effort of the candidate. Evaluators shall not be personal friends of the
candidate. To the greatest extent possible senior and established scholars should
be chosen for such evaluations.
A copy of the external evaluation shall be included in the WP AF and shall be
considered an intrinsic part of the evaluation process.
v. The Library Evaluation Committee and the Library Evaluator must evaluate each item
in the area of research, scholarly, or creative activities. They must also address the
significance of the contribution and the quality of the form in which it is presented, i.e.,
a publication, a paper or presentation, a work in progress, etc. In addition, if the
contribution consists of professional activity such as a consultantship, participation in a
professional organization, a grant or award, the Committee and the Evaluator must
assess its significance and clarify the relevance of the format. Although it is the sole
responsibility of the faculty member to provide documentation, if the Library Evaluation
Committee or the Library Evaluator finds any deficiencies in the faculty member's
documentation of research, scholarly, or creative activities, the Committee or Evaluator
may request clarification, expansion, or additional information from the faculty member
through the LAO before preparing an evaluation. In the event a faculty member fails to
provide requested information or documentation, the Library Evaluation Committee or
the Library Evaluator shall so indicate in their evaluation.

298

vi. Library Evaluation Committees, Library Evaluators, and the Library Dean shall
consider all professional activity materials submitted by the faculty member to
determine the appropriateness and quality of research, scholarly, or creative activities
in light of established criteria and evaluate the faculty member's research, scholarly,
or creative activities relative to academic rank.
vii. The following list of professional activities should be regarded as exemplary in
nature and is not meant to be limiting, definitive or prescriptive in its order. Work
professionally evaluated by peers in the field is generally more significant. Some
parts of this list are more appropriate to specific academic areas than others. The
individual contribution to collaborative activities must be clearly stated on a Joint
Activity Report form.
Receipt of a fellowship, grant, contract, award, prize, or other indication of
professional recognition.
• Active participation in seminars, conferences, meetings, or other activities
leading to research, scholarly, or creative activities.
• Continuing education, retraining, and the development of new skills relevant
to one's current or potential assignment. Evidence of these activities may be
taking courses; earning advanced degrees; or participating in professional
conferences, seminars, workshops, institutes, or special programs. Such
activities should lead to the systematic updating of knowledge.
• Presentations at professional meetings dealing with research, investigative
activity, or creative activity.
• Publications, such as books or texts (whole or parts thereof), journal or
periodical articles, or any other type of academically specialized form such as
music, script, software, etc. Professionally recognized or refereed publications
are generally more significant.
• Creative activity culminating in a public display or performance such as
might occur in music, art, drama, poetry reading, etc.
Active leadership and/or service in recognized professional societies. (This
activity may also be relevant to Service to university.)
Consultantships, whether paid or unpaid, of a professional nature.
Editing, reviewing, indexing, abstracting, or performing other editorial work for
professional or scholarly publications.
Any other items of specific professional activity, such as work in progress,
research related to assignments, etc.
c. Service to university and/or community

299

In addition to demonstrated effectiveness in performance of professional assignments
and continued research, scholarly, or creative activities, faculty members must also
participate in professionally related service to the University and/or community.
1. Scope of service to university and/or community
Faculty are uniquely qualified to contribute to the mission of the University in a
variety of ways, such as participating in institutional governance, evaluating the
professional performance of their colleagues, sponsoring student organizations, etc.
Service to community related to the mission of the University brings recognition not
only to the University but to the faculty as well. Service should be consistent with
the professional abilities, expertise, and leadership qualities of the faculty members
and should foster an intellectual relationship with the off-campus community. The
term "community" may refer to local, regional, state, national, or international
entities.
Service to the University and/or the community shall be demonstrated by
documented evidence submitted with the FAR. The following list provides
examples of items that may be used. This list provides examples only and must not
be construed as limiting, definitive, or prescriptive in its order.
• Service to university
Active participation in service to and/or governance of the library, the campus
and/or University System. If a librarian is given release time to perform such a
service, this shall not be considered in evaluating the quality of such service.
However, having received released time may be considered when evaluating
the quantity of such service.
Attendance and active participation at library meetings.
Active participation on committees at all levels of the University and the University
System.
Participation in educational equity programs and activities.
Authorship of documents, reports, or other materials pertinent to the University's
mission or operation.

300

Advisor or sponsor to student groups on campus.
Assisting with grants, documents, contracts, proposals, reports, or other materials
pertinent to the University's mission or operation.
Active participation in library, campus and/or University-wide Advisory Groups.
• Service to community
Service at local, state, and federal government level. Consultantships to service
to community groups.
Media presentations such as interviews, articles, speeches, or other
presentations in newspapers, magazines, radio, television, or film.
Lectures, speeches, talks, presentations and/or displays given to schools,
community groups, or the University community, e.g. at science fairs, art shows,
or music contests; assisting educational marathons; officiating at sporting
events;
or similar activity.
Active participation and/or office holding in civic, educational, service, or
humanitarian groups.
Participation in community partnership activities which enhance social,
economic, and cultural conditions.
ii. Evaluation of Service to university and/or community
The faculty member shall describe and provide documentation for Service to
the university and/or community. Evidence may include, but shall not be
limited to, letters of invitation, memoranda documenting service, programs,
membership lists, and other appropriate items. This evidence shall be attached
to the FAR.
Additional supporting evidence may be obtained through the Library
Evaluator's report.
The Library and the University Evaluation Committees, as well as the Library
Dean, shall evaluate the nature of the service to the University and/or
community. They shall also determine if it is appropriate to the faculty member's
rank.
Evaluation Rating System

301

The Library and University Evaluation Committees, and the Library Dean are required to
use the standards for evaluation set by the library. If Library Standards are not available
for a category, then University Standards for that category are to be used to evaluate a
librarian.
I. Evaluation Scale
The Library and University Evaluation Committees, and the Library Dean shall apply the
established criteria to the performance of a faculty member relative to that faculty
member's academic rank. Evaluation of a librarian applies only to the rank at the time of
the evaluation.
Therefore, a rating of Above Expectation for retention at the rank of Assistant Librarian
at the second year does not imply that this candidate is ready for promotion or tenure.
It only means that for a second-year Senior Assistant Librarian the candidate is Above
Expectations.
a. Above Expectations: This rating reflects performance above the established criteria
for the rank at the time of the current evaluation.
b. Meets Expectations: This rating reflects performance within the range of the
established criteria for the rank at the time of the current evaluation.
c. Below Expectations: This rating reflects performance below the established range of
criteria for the rank at the time of the current evaluation.
d. Well Below Expectations: This rating reflects performance well below the range of
established criteria for the rank at the time of the current evaluation.
2. Outcomes of Evaluation
a. Second-Year Retention Review
i. If a faculty member is evaluated at Meets Expectations ( or higher) in two
categories and no lower than Below Expectations in the third category, then the
faculty member will be recommended for retention at the rank of Senior
Assistant Librarian at the second year.
ii. If a faculty member is evaluated at Below Expectations in two categories and
at Meets Expectations (or higher) in the third category, the faculty member will
be recommended for retention at the rank of Senior Assistant Librarian at the
second year. In this case, the retention will include recommendations from the
President or his designee for successful future reviews.
m. If a faculty member is evaluated at Well Below Expectations in any of the
three
categories, or at Below Expectations or Well Below Expectations in all three

302

categories, then the faculty member will not be recommended for retention.
b. Fourth-Year Retention Review
i. If a faculty member is evaluated at Meets Expectations (or higher) in all three
categories, then the faculty member will be recommended for retention at the fourth
year.
ii. If a faculty member is evaluated at Below Expectations in any of the three
categories and at Meets Expectations (or higher) in the other two categories, the
faculty member will be recommended for retention. In this case, the retention will
include recommendations from the President or his designee for successful future
reviews.
iii. If a faculty member is evaluated at Well Below Expectations in any of the three
categories, or is evaluated at Below Expectations in two or more categories, the
faculty member will not be recommended for retention.
c. Tenure
i. To be recommended for tenure at the current rank at the time of the
evaluation, the faculty member must be evaluated at Meets Expectations (or
higher) in all three categories.
ii. If a faculty member is evaluated at Below Expectations ( or lower) in any of the
three categories, the faculty member will not be recommended for tenure.
d. Promotion to the Rank of Associate Librarian
i. To be recommended for promotion to the rank of Associate Librarian, the
faculty member must be evaluated at Above Expectations in one of the
categories and at Meets Expectations (or higher) in the other two categories at
the current rank.
ii. If a faculty member is evaluated at Below Expectations (or lower) in any of the
three categories, the faculty member will not be recommended for promotion to
the rank of Associate Librarian.
e. Promotion to Librarian
i. To be recommended for promotion to Librarian, a faculty member must be

303

evaluated at Above Expectations in one of the categories and at Meets
Expectations (or higher) in the other two categories at the current rank.
ii. If a faculty member is evaluated at Below Expectations ( or lower) in any of the
three categories, the faculty member will not be recommended for promotion to
Librarian.
Application of Criteria and Rating System
Faculty members who request early promotion are evaluated by the same standards
according to rank as faculty members considered at the end of the normal probationary
period.
Faculty members who request early tenure shall be considered to be at the end of the
normal probationary period and be evaluated the same as any faculty member
requesting tenure or promotion. In addition, faculty members requesting early tenure
shall have demonstrated an outstanding and sustained record of involvement and
achievement, on this campus or elsewhere, indicative of a commitment to continued
professional performance in assignments, research, scholarly or creative contributions,
and service to the University.
A faculty member applying for early tenure must be evaluated at Meets Expectations (or
higher) in eachof the three categories to be recommended for early tenure. A faculty
member applying for early promotion must be evaluated at Above Expectations in at
least one category and at Meets Expectations (or higher) in the other two categories to
be recommended for early promotion. In progressing through the levels of Senior
Assistant Librarian, Associate Librarian, and Librarian, an increasingly rigorous
application of the criteria shall be applied.
1. MEETS EXPECTATIONS and ABOVE EXPECTATIONS in the area of professional assignments
a. Meets Expectations in the Area of Professional Assignment
At the rank of Senior Assistant Librarian: During years two and three of the probationary
period, the MEETS EXPECTATIONS faculty member at the rank of Senior Assistant
Librarian must demonstrate command of professional knowledge. Strong indications of
developing abilities must also be demonstrated in the other professional assignments
criteria. During subsequent years, competence in the appropriate professional
assignments criteria must be evident.

304

At the rank of Associate Librarian: The MEETS EXPECTATIONS faculty member at the
rank
of Associate Librarian must demonstrate proficiency in the appropriate professional
assignments criteria. At the rank of Librarian: The MEETS EXPECTATIONS faculty
member at the rank of Librarian must demonstrate proficiency in the appropriate
professional assignments criteria and demonstrate a record of involvement and
achievement indicative of a commitment to continue professional performance of
professional assignments.
b. Above Expectations in the Area of Professional Assignments
To be considered ABOVE EXPECTATIONS in the area of professional assignments, the
faculty member must meet the requirements set forth above for MEETS EXPECTATIONS
appropriate to rank. In addition to this, the faculty member must meet at least one of
the following additional criteria:
i. A preponderance of evidence demonstrating excellence in professional
assignments as indicated in the FAR, the Library Evaluator's Report, or additional
appropriate
documentation related to professional assignment.
ii. A record of distinction for some aspect of professional assignments at or
beyond the University.
2. MEETS EXPECTATIONS and ABOVE EXPECTATIONS in the area of research,
scholarly, or creative activities
Qualitative and quantitative standards should be used to assess research, scholarly, or
creative activities.
a. MEETS EXPECTATIONS in the Area of Research, Scholarly, or Creative Activities
At the rank of Senior Assistant Librarian: During years two and three of the probationary
period, the MEETS EXPECTATIONS faculty member at the rank of Senior Assistant
Librarian must demonstrate involvement in professional activities. In subsequent years,
continued active involvement in and successful completion of some professionally
evaluated activities should be evident (see Chapter 2, Section II.
B. 6. for examples of professional activities).
At the rank of Associate Librarian: The MEETS EXPECTATIONS faculty member at the
rank of Associate Librarian must demonstrate a record of active involvement in and

305

successful accomplishment of research, scholarly, or creative activities. Successful
accomplishment at this level normally requires that some complete work be
professionally evaluated (see Chapter 2, Section II. B. 6 for examples of professional
activities).
At the rank of Librarian: The MEETS EXPECTATIONS faculty member at the rank of
Librarian must demonstrate a record of successful accomplishment and recognition in
research, scholarly, or creative activities (see Chapter 2, Section IL B. 6 for examples of
professional activities).
b. ABOVE EXPECTATIONS in the Area of Research, Scholarly, or Creative Activities
To be considered ABOVE EXPECTATIONS in the area of research, scholarly, or creative
activities the faculty member must as a minimum, have met the requirement set forth
above
for MEETS EXPECTATIONS appropriate to rank. In addition to this, the faculty member
must also have attained recognition beyond the University in research, scholarly or
creative activities.
3. MEETS EXPECTATIONS and $ABOVE EXPECTATIONS in the area of service to university
and/or community
a. MEETS EXPECTATIONS in the Area of Service
At the rank of Senior Assistant Librarian: The MEETS EXPECTATIONS faculty member
should demonstrate a developing level of participation particularly at the library level
within the area of service. (See Chapter 2, Section II. C. 1 for examples of service
activities.) For the purpose of awarding tenure, the MEETS EXPECTATIONS faculty
member must demonstrate significant participation in the area of service.
At the rank of Associate Librarian: The MEETS EXPECTATIONS faculty member at this
rank must demonstrate significant participation in the area of service. (See Chapter 2,
Section II. C. 1 for examples of service activities.) For a faculty member hired at this
rank, a MEETS EXPECTATIONS rating may be assigned for demonstrating sufficient
progress
towards achieving this standard by the third probationary year.
At the rank of Librarian: In addition to significant participation in service activities, the
MEETS EXPECTATIONS faculty member is expected to provide effective leadership in
some of these activities. (See Chapter 3, Section II. C. I for examples of service activities.)

306

For a faculty member hired at this rank, a MEETS EXPECT A TIO NS rating may be
assigned for demonstrating sufficient progress towards achieving this standard by their
third probationary year.
b. ABOVE EXPECTATIONS in the Area of Service
A rating of ABOVE EXPECTATIONS in this area is awarded for exceptional service that
has been clearly documented as to quantity and quality. To be considered ABOVE
EXPECTATIONS in the area of service, the faculty member must meet the qualifications
set forth above for MEETS EXPECTATIONS appropriate to academic rank. In addition, the
faculty member must demonstrate unusual effectiveness or performance as a
contributor or leader in the University, the off-campus community, or a combination of
both.
Criteria for Periodic Evaluation of Non-Tenured Faculty
1. Temporary full-time faculty
2. Temporary full-time faculty
Temporary full-time faculty members employed for more than two semesters shall be
evaluated in the areas of professional assignments, research, scholarly, or creative
activities, and service to the University and/or community, as specified in their
contracts. The applicable criteria are the same as for faculty members subject to
performance review.
3. Temporary part-time faculty
Temporary part-time faculty members employed for more than two semesters shall
only be evaluated in the area of professional assignments. The applicable criteria in
evaluating this are are the same as for librarians subject to performance review.
4. First-, third- and fifth-year probationary faculty
First, third-, and fifth-year probationary faculty members shall be evaluated in the areas
of professional assignments, research, scholarly, or creative activities, and service to the
University and/or community. The applicable criteria in evaluating those areas are the
same as for faculty members subject to performance review.
Periodic Evaluation of Tenured Faculty

307

The purpose of periodic evaluation of tenured faculty members is to assure the
continuation of high- quality library services within the University. The program is
designed to maintain excellence in performance, professional assignments, research,
scholarly, or creative activities, and service to the University and community. This
process is intended to be both positive and supportive.
1. Procedures for periodic evaluation
a. Each academic year, tenured faculty members who are no longer subject to
performance review and who have not been reviewed during the previous five-year
period shall be subject to periodic evaluation. Whenever more than 25% of such
tenured faculty in the library are scheduled for periodic evaluation, the Library
Evaluation Committee may determine by lot a one-year postponement of sufficient
reviews to reduce the number to less than 25%.
Also subject to periodic evaluation are tenured faculty members whose previous
evaluations resulted in a decision to review prior to the normal five-year period.
b. During the Fall of the evaluation year those faculty members subject to evaluation
shall submit a FAR to the LAO. The report shall be cumulative over the previous five
years or since the last evaluation.
c. The following materials shall be assembled into a WPAF by the LAO.
i. A FAR covering previous five years or since the period covered by the last
evaluation
ii. Other materials deemed relevant by the faculty member
d. The Library Evaluator will review the assembled file first (See INSTRUMENTS OF
EVALUATION, 3 above for details). Next, the Library Evaluation Committee will review
the assembled file and prepare a summary report commenting on the overall
effectiveness of the faculty member's performance, specifying remedies if any, and
indicating when the next review should take place. A copy of this report shall be given to
the faculty member who shall have the right to submit a written response which may be
a rebuttal.
e. The WP AF, the Library Evaluator's report, the Library Evaluation Committee's report,
and responses, if any, shall be forwarded to the Library Dean for review. If requested by

308

the faculty member, the Library Dean, the Library Evaluator, the chair of the Library
Evaluation Committee, and the faculty member shall meet to discuss the contents of
and any recommendations contained in the reports. The reports, along with a statement
from the Library Dean establishing the next scheduled evaluation, shall then become a
part of the PAF. The Library Dean's statement may include more than the date for the
next scheduled evaluation, but this is optional.
f. The review process for the evaluation of tenured faculty shall be completed in
accordance with the Timetable for Periodic Evaluation and Performance Review.
2. Criteria: Tenured faculty shall be evaluated in the areas of professional assignments,
research,
scholarly, or creative activities, and service to the University and community. The applicable
criteria in evaluating these areas are the same as for faculty members subject to performance
evaluation.
3. Exclusion: Members of the Library Evaluation Committee shall not participate in their own
review; that is, faculty undergoing Formative review may serve on a library evaluation
committee but must recuse themselves for their own review.
4. Delays in review: Although the CBA is silent on delays in the review process, the University
recognizes that unforeseen emergency situations may arise so that a delay in review is
inevitable. Reasons for a delay must be serious and compelling. Requests for a delay in review
must be made in writing with specific reasons stated for the delay. These requests must be
submitted to the Library Dean. Delays of no more than one year may be granted except in
exceptional circumstances, such as a multiple year leave of absence, when more than one year
may be granted, by the Library Dean in consultation with the Library Evaluation Committee.
Guidelines for the Evaluation of Tenure-Line Library Faculty
Each academic department has the option of preparing written discipline/program specific
guidelines for application of criteria in the areas of professional assignment, professional
growth, and service contained in FAM 652.1: Evaluation of Tenure-Line Faculty. These
discipline-specific guidelines must strictly conform to the university-wide criteria and are
intended to provide guidance to faculty on those items that tend to have greater applicability
for their academic area.

309

The departmental guidelines are not intended to supersede the listing of criteria contained in
the campus document nor to impose any pedagogical technique, and as such may not eliminate
or exclude any criterion listed in the areas of professional assignment, research, scholarly, or
creative activities, and service.
1. Guidelines. The library evaluation guidelines are expected to conform to the following
specifications
a. Professional Assignment: Description in general terms of professional techniques or
approaches, which are best suited for this library.
b. Research, Scholarly, or Creative Activities: The most appropriate professional
activities
listed in FAM 652.1: Evaluation of Tenure-Line Faculty may be indicated, and
suggestions
given on how best to engage in those activities to achieve professional
accomplishments.
Guidelines must avoid setting specific quantitative goals, since each evaluation
committee
must evaluate both quantitative and qualitative aspects of professional activities and
achievements. Additionally, strict rank ordering of items shall be avoided, but clear
identification of the most appropriate professional growth activities is encouraged.
c. Service. The most appropriate service activities listed in FAM 652.1: Evaluation of
Tenure-Line Faculty may be indicated.
2. Procedure for approval
The Library Dean is responsible for ensuring that the guidelines are developed, or amended,
with the full participation of all tenured and tenure-track faculty in the library. Guidelines and
any subsequent modifications must receive approval from a majority of the library faculty, and
approval through the normal faculty senate process, prior to implementation. Faculty senate
consideration shall be limited to determining whether or not the proposed guidelines fall within
the general parameters of FAM 652.1: Evaluation of Tenure-Line Faculty.
3. Distribution of guidelines

310

The Library Evaluator is responsible for distributing copies of department guidelines each fall to
faculty involved in the review process. For new faculty, the Library Evaluator shall both provide
a written copy of the guidelines and meet with the individuals to discuss the content of
guidelines.

FAM 652.4
EVALUATION OF TENURE-LINE LIBRARY FACULTY
FAM 652.4 Evaluation of Tenure Line Library Faculty

Purpose and Scope
The purpose of library faculty evaluation is to develop and maintain high-quality library faculty
who are intellectually and professionally active in the performance of professional assignments;
research, scholarly, and creative contributions; and service to the university and/or community.
Peer judgment is vital to any evaluation process in academia. Peer evaluation occurs at
all levels of library faculty evaluation.
Evaluation also includes administrative review.
Procedures contained in this document are in accordance with the Collective Bargaining
Agreement (CBA). If an inconsistency is found between this policy and the CBA that is in effect,
the CBA shall prevail.
There are several policies in the Faculty Administrative Manual (FAM) governing the evaluation
of different categories of faculty as defined in the CBA: instructional faculty; student services
professionals, academic related; library faculty; and coaching faculty.
This policy focuses on the evaluation of tenure-line library faculty (defined below).
Background Information
The CSUSB Libraries are not structured in the same way as the colleges. Although
there is a Library Dean, there are no department chairs or their equivalent.
Many, but not all library faculty teach, typically through one-time classes or workshops.

311

Definitions
1. RPT: Retention, promotion, and tenure.
2. FAR: Faculty Activity Report. A narrative report on the activity during the period
under evaluation in these three sections—Performance of Professional Assignments;
Research, Scholarly, or Creative Contributions; and Service to the University and/or
Community. “Community” refers to the CSUSB community, the CSU community, the
local community, professional communities, etc.
3. Performance Review: An evaluation cycle during which recommendations for
retention, promotion, and/or tenure are made at each level and ultimately a decision is
made regarding the same.
4. Periodic Evaluation: An evaluation cycle with no recommendations or decisions
regarding retention, promotion, and/or tenure.
5. Tenure-Line Library Faculty: Those library faculty who are either probationary or
tenured.
6. Ranks of Tenure-Line Library Faculty: There are three ranks of library faculty—Senior
Assistant Librarian, Associate Librarian, and Librarian (capital L).
7. Library Evaluator: The individual in this elected position (two-year term) is the first
level of evaluation for all library faculty.
8. Library Evaluation Committee: These three elected members (staggered two-year
terms) are the second level of evaluation for all library faculty.
9. Library Dean: The third level of evaluation for all library faculty.
10.University Evaluation Committee: The fourth level of evaluation for all library faculty
subject to a performance review. An elected library faculty member (two-year term) is a
member of this committee.
11. FAD Office: Faculty Affairs and Development Office.
12.PAF: Personnel Action File. The cumulative official record for an employee.

312

13.WPAF: Working Personnel Action File. A subset of the PAF used in evaluations.
14.Timetable for Periodic Evaluation and Performance Review of Library Faculty: The
official document containing the relevant calendar dates for all evaluation cycles for the
current academic year. The dates are not the same as those in the timetable for other
faculty.
Policy Statement
1. There are two types of evaluation of tenure-line library faculty. First is performance
review, applicable to all library faculty for purposes of determining retention, tenure,
and/or promotion. The second type of evaluation is periodic evaluation, applicable to all
library faculty not subject to performance review.
2. Only tenured library or other faculty and academic administrators may engage in the
evaluation of tenure-line library faculty. Evaluation criteria and procedures shall be
available to library faculty well in advance of evaluation. No changes in such criteria or
procedures may be made during the evaluation process.
3. At all levels of evaluation, and for both types of evaluations, before reports are
forwarded to the next level, library faculty being evaluated shall be given a copy of each
report. Those reports shall clearly state the reasons for any recommendations. Library
faculty have the right to respond or rebut within ten calendar days following their
receipt of a report from the FAD Office. Copies of the response or rebuttal shall be
placed in the Working Personnel Action File (WPAF) to be available to subsequent
evaluators and also shall be sent to any evaluators at previous levels in the current
evaluation. The library faculty being evaluated may request an opportunity to discuss
the report and any recommendations with the evaluating party. This discussion shall not
alter the evaluation timeline.
4. Recommendations or decisions relating to retention, tenure, promotion, termination,
or any other personnel action shall be based primarily on material contained in the
WPAF. If a personnel recommendation or decision is based on reasons not contained in
the WPAF, the party making the recommendation or decision shall commit those
reasons to writing in a signed statement to be placed in the WPAF and another copy
provided to the library faculty member. In cases of promotion, Library Evaluation
Committee members must have a higher rank than those being considered for
promotion. If, for this reason, a member of the Library Evaluation Committee must

313

withdraw, the library faculty being evaluated for promotion may either give consent for
the review to proceed with the remaining two members or submit a name of a qualified
person able to serve for this one evaluation to the Library Dean for approval.
5. Recommendations shall be confidential.
6. The timetable for the evaluation of library faculty is different from that of the other
faculty. It is prepared annually prior to the next academic year by the chair of the
Library Evaluation Committee in collaboration with the FAD Office and approved
by the Faculty Senate.
Overview of Evaluation
1. Participants
a. Library Evaluator
Selection: The Library Evaluator shall hold the rank of Librarian and be elected for a twoyear term. In the event that the current Library Evaluator is presently up for an
evaluation, they will submit a name of a qualified person able to serve for this one
evaluation to the Library Dean for approval.
i. Function: Since there are no department chairs or their equivalent in the
CSUSB Libraries, the Library Evaluator is the first level of evaluation for all
evaluations of tenure-line library faculty. The Library Evaluator cannot
concurrently serve on the Library Evaluation Committee or the University
Evaluation Committee.
b. Library Evaluation Committee
Composition: The Library Evaluation Committee shall be composed of three tenured,
elected members, two of whom must hold the rank of Librarian and the third, Associate
Librarian or Librarian. All members serve a two-year term. The committee shall elect a
chair who shall hold the rank of Librarian. No member of this committee can
concurrently serve as the Library Evaluator or on the University Evaluation Committee.
No one who is presently up for evaluation may serve on the committee. In the event
that one of the committee members must withdraw for this reason, they may either
give consent for the review to proceed with the remaining two members or submit a
name of a qualified person able to serve for this one evaluation to the Library Dean for
approval.

314

i. In the event of insufficient eligible/willing library faculty, faculty members from
outside the library (Associate Professor or Professor) shall be invited by the
library faculty to serve. Faculty in the Faculty Early Retirement Plan (FERP) are
eligible to serve on the Library Evaluation Committee if (a) the period of active
employment spans the period of the committee’s work, and (b) the appointment
is approved by the Library Dean. However, evaluation committees may not be
comprised solely of faculty participating in the FERP.
ii. Function: The Library Evaluation Committee shall conduct both performance
reviews and periodic evaluations of tenure-line library faculty. It is the second
level of evaluation for all tenure-line library faculty.
c. Library Dean
i. Function: This administrative position shall conduct both performance
reviews and periodic evaluations of tenure-line library faculty. The Library
Dean is the third level of evaluation for all tenure-line library faculty.
d. University Evaluation Committee
i. Composition: The University Evaluation Committee shall be composed of one
tenured Professor elected from each college by the tenure-line faculty of the
college, one tenured Librarian elected by the tenure-line library faculty, and one
tenured Student Services Professional, Academic-related (SSPAR) elected by the
tenure-line SSPARs. Department chairs or associate/assistant deans may not
serve on this committee. Library Evaluators, Library Evaluation Committee
members, and Library Deans may not serve on this committee. Members shall
serve two-year staggered terms. The committee shall elect its chair. Members of
this committee cannot serve concurrently as a member of any evaluation
committee at a lower level.
Faculty in the Faculty Early Retirement Plan (FERP) are eligible to serve on the
University Evaluation Committee if (a) the period of active employment spans
the period of the committee’s work, and (b) the appointment is approved by the
Provost and Vice President of Academic Affairs. However, evaluation committees
may not be comprised solely of faculty participating in the FERP.
ii. Function: This committee shall conduct performance reviews of faculty at the
university level in cases where recommendations from the department
evaluation committee, department chair, college evaluation committee, and
dean are not unanimous as well as in cases involving non-retention, denial of

315

tenure, or denial of promotion. This committee shall also serve as the higherlevel peer review committee for library faculty and SSPARs. Its ratings shall be
based primarily on previous recommendations and ratings. It is highly
recommended that the committee members attend training provided by the
FAD Office prior to the review and discussion of files.
2. Instruments of Evaluation
a. Faculty Activities Reports (FARs): FARs shall be submitted by all evaluated library
faculty. FARs shall cover all three areas of evaluation—performance of professional
assignments; research, scholarly, or creative contributions; service to the university
and/or community. A FAR should cover the following periods of time:
i. For all probationary library faculty, cumulative since appointment.
ii. For all tenured library faculty applying for promotion to Associate Librarian or
Librarian, cumulative since the submission of the FAR that led to tenure or the
FAR that led to the previous promotion, whichever is more recent.
iii. For all tenured library faculty subject to periodic evaluation, cumulative
since the submission of the most recent FAR.
b. Supporting Documentation: The evaluated library faculty will provide a brief narrative
explaining the significance of their work and contributions in each area of the FAR:
performance of professional assignments; research, scholarly, or creative contributions;
and service to the university and/or community. Supporting documentation for
activities must be attached, for example, reprints of publications, appropriate evidence
regarding speeches, consultation, performances, exhibitions, and work in progress, as
exemplified below:
i. For all probationary library faculty, all supporting documentation since
appointment.
ii. For all tenured library faculty applying for promotion to Associate Librarian
or Librarian, all supporting documentation since the submission of the FAR
that led to tenure or the FAR that led to the previous promotion, whichever
is more recent.
iii. For all tenured library faculty subject to periodic evaluation, all supporting

316

documentation since the submission of the most recent FAR.
iv. For probationary library faculty granted service credit for accomplishments
achieved before joining CSUSB, the documentation for these accomplishments
shall be included. They will be given equal weight during evaluation as those
achieved at CSUSB but, viewed as a whole, shall not be the majority of evidence
for the granting of tenure or promotion to the rank of Associate Librarian.
v. Probationary library faculty not granted service credit for accomplishments
achieved before joining CSUSB, may opt to document these accomplishments. If
documented, these accomplishments shall be considered. Evaluators shall
decide how much weight—if any—these accomplishments should be given in
their recommendations. All FARs must be accompanied by an Index of
Attachments. In the case of collaborative research, scholarly, or creative
contributions, or any other collaborative activities or accomplishments, a Joint
Activities Report must be submitted.
c. Library Evaluator’s Report: The Library Evaluator shall evaluate submitted FARs and
complete a report for every library faculty member being evaluated whether for a
performance review or a periodic evaluation. This report makes no recommendations
regarding retention, promotion, or tenure decisions regardless of the type of evaluation.
When a report is completed, but before it is submitted to the FAD Office, a copy of the
report is shared with the library faculty member being evaluated to allow for any
feedback, corrections, etc. Any mutually agreed-upon changes shall be incorporated
into the final report submitted to the FAD Office. Upon their receipt of the final report
from the FAD Office, the library faculty member may submit a written response or
rebuttal within ten calendar days. Any such responses or rebuttals are added to the
WPAF to be available for succeeding levels of evaluation.
d. Library Evaluation Committee’s Report: The Library Evaluation Committee shall
evaluate submitted FARs along with the Library Evaluator’s reports. The committee’s
reports for periodic evaluations shall not make recommendations regarding retention,
promotion, or tenure decisions. This is reserved for the committee’s reports for
performance reviews. Completed reports are submitted to the FAD Office. Upon their
receipt of the final report from the FAD Office, the library faculty member may submit a
written response or rebuttal within ten calendar days. Any such responses or rebuttals
are added to the WPAF to be available for succeeding levels of evaluation with a copy to
the Library Evaluator.

317

e. Library Dean’s Report: The Library Dean shall evaluate submitted FARs along with the
reports from the Library Evaluator and the Library Evaluation committee. The dean’s
reports for periodic evaluations shall not make recommendations regarding retention,
promotion, or tenure decisions. This is reserved for the dean’s reports for performance
reviews. Completed reports are submitted to the FAD Office.
Upon their receipt of the final report from the FAD Office, the library faculty member
may submit a written response or rebuttal within ten calendar days. Any such responses
or rebuttals are added to the WPAF to be available for any succeeding levels of
evaluation with copies to the Library Evaluation Committee and the Library Evaluator.
The Library Dean is the highest level of evaluation for all periodic evaluations of library
faculty.
f. University Evaluation Committee Report: This committee serves as a higher level of
evaluation for all library faculty subject to performance reviews. This committee shall
evaluate submitted FARs along with the reports from the Library Evaluator, the Library
Evaluation Committee, and the Library Dean. The report shall make recommendations
regarding retention, promotion, or tenure decisions. Completed reports are submitted
to the FAD Office. Upon their receipt of the final report from the FAD Office, the library
faculty member may submit a written response or rebuttal within ten calendar days.
Any such responses or rebuttals are added to the WPAF to be available for succeeding
levels of evaluation.
3. Files for Evaluation
a. The Personnel Action File (PAF)
i. A PAF shall be maintained for each library faculty member in the FAD Office
except the PAFs for tenured library faculty which are kept in the Library Dean’s
office.
ii. Library faculty shall have the right to submit additional materials or written
rebuttals to any material in the PAF. Officially authorized bodies or persons also
can submit additional materials for inclusion in a PAF. The sources of these
documents must be identified. Identification shall indicate the author, the
committee, the office, or the name of the officially authorized body. The library

318

faculty member concerned must be provided with a copy of any such document
at least five days prior to its inclusion in their PAF.
iii. Library faculty have the right of access to all materials in the PAF, exclusive of
pre-employment materials, unless the pre-employment materials are used in
personnel actions.
iv. Library faculty may request copies of material in their PAFs. A copy of all
materials requested shall be provided within fourteen calendar days. If a library
faculty member finds an inaccuracy, they may request a correction or deletion. If
the request is denied, the library faculty member shall have seven calendar days
to submit the request to the President or designee. Within twenty-one calendar
days of the request to the President or designee, the President or designee shall
provide to the library faculty member a written response. If the President or
designee grants the request, the record shall be corrected or the deletions made,
and the library faculty member shall be sent a written statement to that effect. If
the President or designee denies the request, the response shall include
reasons for denial.
v. PAFs shall be held in confidence, accessible only to persons with official
business. Access to a PAF shall be logged and the log shall be part of the
PAF itself.
b. Working Personnel Action File (WPAF)
The WPAF is a subset of the PAF, including documents assembled for the purpose of a
scheduled evaluation. The WPAF shall include the following:
i. The current FAR (with an Index of Attachments which lists all supporting
documentation and materials).
ii. All relevant supporting documentation for the current evaluation cycle.
iii. All current and previous reports from the Library Evaluator, the Library
Evaluation Committee, the Library Dean, and the University Evaluation
Committee. Current reports are incorporated upon submission to the FAD Office.
iv. Any responses or rebuttals.

319

Supporting documentation and materials submitted with a FAR do not need to
be physically placed in the PAF. The Index of Attachments that accompanies
a FAR shall serve instead and be permanently placed in the PAF.
4. Recommendations: Recommendations for retention, tenure, and/or promotion shall be
made following a thorough review of the WPAF at each level of evaluation. All recommenders
shall ensure that criteria are applied consistently across library faculty. If there are omissions of
documentation, information, or recommendation in the materials, the materials may be
returned by the FAD Office for amplification. Amplification documents shall be provided in a
timely Manner.
5. Decisions: The President or designee shall receive the WPAF, evaluate its contents and
recommendations, and reach a decision. The President’s or designee’s decision shall be
communicated in writing to the library faculty with the reasons for the decision clearly stated.
Performance Review
1. Definitions and General Provisions
a. Performance Review: Performance review is the process whereby decisions
concerning retention, promotion, and tenure are made. Performance reviews are based
upon information obtained from peers and administrators in the manner described in
this document. Upon completion of deliberations at each level of a performance review,
a report with recommendations is submitted to the FAD Office. A copy shall be provided
by the FAD Office to the evaluated library faculty, who has the option to respond in
writing within ten calendar days from their receipt of the copy.
Probationary library faculty are subject to performance reviews in their second, fourth,
and sixth years. Tenured library faculty applying for promotion also are subject to a
performance review. Some performance reviews for the purpose of promotion are
initiated by the library faculty member rather than the FAD Office. The types of
performance reviews in addition to those for retention are:
i. Early tenure and promotion to Associate Librarian.
ii. Regular tenure and promotion to Associate Librarian.
iii. Promotion to Associate Librarian when it does not occur in tandem with
tenure.

320

iv. Early promotion to Librarian.
v. Regular promotion to Librarian.
The library faculty member rather than the FAD Office initiates the performance
review cycle (i, iii, iv, and v above) in accordance with the applicable dates on the
current Timetable for library faculty by stating their intention to go up for: early
tenure and promotion; promotion to Associate Librarian; early or regular
promotion to Librarian, in writing to the FAD Office.
b. Probation: Probation refers to the period of time in which a library faculty member
demonstrates that they are worthy of tenure. The length of probation at CSUSB shall
normally be six years of full-time service since initial appointment but may include
credited service for experience prior to appointment.
c. Tenure: Tenure is the library faculty member’s right of permanent employment in the
university. Tenure is normally granted along with promotion to Associate Librarian after
the six-year probationary period (performance review in the sixth year) as defined
above and shall be effective at the beginning of the seventh year.
A probationary library faculty member may apply for early tenure, or early tenure and
promotion to Associate Librarian, but not until after four years of service, including
service credit (if applicable), i.e., in the fifth year of the probationary period. The process
and criteria for early tenure or early tenure and promotion to Associate Librarian are the
same as those for regular tenure and promotion.
This time frame for early tenure does not apply to library faculty hired before
September 10, 2019.
d. Promotion: Promotion is the advancement to a higher rank—from Senior Assistant
Librarian to Associate Librarian then Librarian. These two promotions are sequential.
One cannot be promoted from Senior Assistant Librarian to Librarian. Also, one cannot
be promoted from Senior Assistant Librarian to Associate Librarian without tenure.
i. Promotion to the Rank of Associate Librarian: The performance review for
promotion to Associate Librarian normally coincides with the application for
tenure, i.e., in the sixth year of the probationary period although a library faculty
member may be awarded tenure but not promotion. If this happens, the library

321

faculty member initiates an additional performance review at a later time by
stating their intention to go up for promotion in writing to the FAD Office.
A probationary library faculty member may apply for early tenure and promotion
to Associate Librarian but not until after four years of service, including service
credit (if applicable), i.e., in the fifth year of the robationary period. The process
and criteria for early tenure and promotion are the same as for regular tenure
and promotion to Associate Librarian.
This time frame for early tenure and promotion to Associate Librarian does
not apply to library faculty hired before September 10, 2019.
ii. Promotion to the Rank of Librarian: Promotion to the rank of Librarian is
normally granted after five years of service since promotion to Associate
Librarian.
2. Procedures for Performance Reviews
a. The FAD Office sends out a call for FARs to the relevant library faculty with the due
date for submission. The dates for this action and those that follow in the evaluation
cycle are taken from the current Timetable for Periodic Evaluation and Performance
Review of Library Faculty.
b. Library faculty being evaluated complete a FAR and submit it to the FAD Office. The
library faculty should identify and provide materials accessible to them. The Library
Evaluator, the Library Evaluation Committee, the Library Dean, the University Evaluation
Committee, and evaluating campus administrators shall be responsible for identifying
and providing relevant materials not provided by the library faculty concerned.
A specific deadline shall be established for the completion of the WPAF .Insertion of
material after the deadline must be approved by the Library Evaluation Committee and
shall be limited to items that became accessible after the deadline. Inserted material
shall be forwarded to previous evaluators for evaluation before consideration by
subsequent evaluators. If, during the evaluation process, a required evaluation
document is missing, the WPAF shall be returned to the responsible evaluator, who will
then provide the missing document. This step shall not lead to a delay in the evaluation
process.
c. The Library Evaluator, the Library Evaluation Committee, the Library Dean, and the
University Evaluation Committee evaluate the WPAFs in sequence, not concurrently.

322

d. The FAD Office assembles the WPAF, then notifies the Library Evaluator that it is
ready for evaluation. Continuing on, the FAD Office notifies each succeeding level of
evaluation when it is their turn according to the Timetable for Periodic Evaluation and
Performance Review of Library Faculty.
Each of the four levels above generates a report, which, when completed, is submitted
to the FAD Office for addition to the WPAF prior to the next level of evaluation. The FAD
Office also sends a copy of each report to the library faculty being evaluated who has
ten calendar days from their receipt of a report to respond or rebut in writing to the
FAD Office. The due dates for the reports are in the Timetable for Periodic Evaluation
and Performance Review of Library Faculty.
The FAD Office adds copies of any responses or rebuttals to the WPAF and shares copies
with all previous levels of evaluation.
e. The President or designee evaluates the WPAF and makes a decision. Periodic
Evaluation
1. Definitions and General Provisions
a. Periodic Evaluation: Periodic evaluation applies to library faculty who are not subject
to performance review. They are first, third, and fifth-year probationary library faculty
and tenured library faculty.
b. Purpose: The purpose of a periodic evaluation is to assess progress towards the next
performance review. It is intended to be instructive, providing guidance for library
faculty’s success in their RPT process and beyond.
c. Result: Reports containing summary statements on the strengths and weaknesses of
the evaluated library faculty member in all three areas of evaluation from each level of
evaluation. Recommendations for improvements may also be included. During an
evaluation cycle, each of these reports are placed in the WPAF and a copy is provided to
the library faculty member. Upon completion of an evaluation cycle, these reports are
placed in the PAF.
2. Procedures for Periodic Evaluations

323

a. The FAD Office sends out a call for FARs to the relevant library faculty with the due
date for submission. The dates for these actions and those that follow in the evaluation
cycle are taken from the current Timetable for Periodic Evaluation and Performance
Review of Library Faculty.
b. Library faculty complete their FARs and submit them to the FAD Office.
c. The Library Evaluator, the Library Evaluation Committee, and the Library Dean
evaluate the WPAFs in sequence, not concurrently.
d. The FAD Office assembles the WPAF, then notifies the Library Evaluator that it is
ready for evaluation. Continuing on, the FAD Office notifies each succeeding level of
evaluation when it is their turn according to the Timetable for Periodic Evaluation and
Performance Review of Library Faculty.Each of the three levels above generates a
report, which, when completed, is submitted to the FAD Office for addition to the WPAF
prior to the next level of evaluation. The FAD Office also sends a copy of each report to
the library faculty being evaluated who has ten calendar days from their receipt of a
report to respond or rebut in writing to the FAD Office. The due dates for the reports
are in the Timetable for Periodic Evaluation and Performance Review of Library Faculty.
The FAD Office adds copies of any responses or rebuttals to the WPAF and shares copies
with all previous levels of evaluation.
Evaluation Criteria and Their Application
1. Areas of Evaluation
a. Performance of Professional Assignments: The primary function of library faculty at
the California State University is the performance of professional assignments. The
professional environment, nature of the work, and work hours of library faculty are
different from those of the other faculty due to the special nature of libraries which are
cooperative and sequential enterprises involving interdependent functions and
departments. In addition, the work of
librarians requires the application of knowledge and abilities unique to the profession of
librarianship. The factors used in evaluations of library faculty must reflect these unique
elements and responsibilities. Direct, objective evidence of effectiveness in the
performance of professional assignments is crucial to the overall evaluation process.
Effectiveness shall be evaluated by the quality of performance in the various types of
professional assignments. These may include, but are not limited to:

324

● Acquisitions
● Archives
● Cataloging
● Circulation
● Collection Development
● Electronic Resources
● Library Automation
● Library Instruction (general and specialized)
● Reference (in-person and online)
● Special Collections
Library faculty commonly serve in two or more of these areas. They may be responsible
for a particular area of activity, a particular unit, or be a specialist. Evaluators shall
recognize the existence of differences in styles of librarianship. While no single style or
manner of librarianship can be established as best for all library faculty or their
professional assignments, library faculty are expected to work effectively in the
performance of professional assignments. Evaluation shall be based on the particular
methods used by the evaluated library faculty and whether or not those methods are
likely to produce the desired results. Primary sources for evidence concerning the
quality of the performance of professional assignments shall be the FAR and the Library
Evaluator’s report. The Library Evaluation Committee, the Library Dean, and the
University Evaluation Committee shall evaluate the performance of professional
assignments. They shall also determine if such performance is appropriate to the library
faculty member’s rank. Quality of performance of professional assignments shall be
evaluated in the following areas:
i. Command of Professional Knowledge: Credentials presented by a library
faculty upon appointment attest initially to their command of professional
knowledge. Thereafter, keeping current with the professional knowledge of
librarianship and incorporating any relevant changes into their professional
assignments shall serve this purpose.
ii. Effectiveness in Performance of Professional Assignments: Library faculty
must effectively use their professional knowledge. Effectiveness in performance
of professional assignments is demonstrated by the degree of proficiency; the
demonstrated ability to work either independently or collaboratively as needed;
the initiative and/or innovations shown; and the versatility to work effectively in
all facets of their professional assignments.

325

iii. Oversight, When Appropriate, of Programs and Staff: Some library faculty may
be responsible for overseeing the operation of a particular area of library activity
or a library unit and its related staff. Such library faculty shall demonstrate
appropriate knowledge and effective deployment of managerial duties such as
establishing goals and objectives; monitoring a budget; and planning, organizing,
and coordinating personnel and procedures, etc., relevant to whatever they
oversee.
iv. Performance, When Appropriate, as a Non-Supervisory Specialist: Some
library faculty may be assigned to an area of activity as a non-supervisory
specialist. Such library faculty shall demonstrate intensive knowledge and/or
activity in this area beyond the criteria established in this document.
b. Research, Scholarly, or Creative Contributions: Evaluators must recognize
that given the multifaceted profession of librarianship, no single method exists
for library faculty to demonstrate performance in this area.
i. It shall be the sole responsibility of the evaluated library faculty member to
provide documented evidence of research, scholarly, or creative
contributions referenced in their FAR. Examples of items which may be
used include, but are not limited to:
● Books, book chapters, entries in reference works, book reviews
● Articles of all types, preferably published in scholarly journals
● Editing books
● Conference papers and/or presentations
● Grants
● Programs
● Consultantships
● Professional organization activity
● Any documentation indicating acceptance for publication
● Any other appropriate professionally generated materials
ii. The library faculty member may consult with the Library Evaluator to as
certain that their FAR contains a thorough description of their professional
activities and reflects a true picture of accomplishments in research, scholarly, or
creative contributions.

326

iii. A request for an external review of materials may be initiated at any level of
evaluation by any party. The request must be approved by the President or
designee with the concurrence of the library faculty member.
When the request for an external review has been approved, the library faculty
member shall provide to the FAD Office a list of names from which one or more
external evaluators may be chosen. The Library Evaluator, the Library Evaluation
Committee, and/or the Library Dean shall consider this list and may opt to add
names to it. The FAD Office, with the consent of the library faculty member, will
coordinate the selection of one or moreexternal evaluators from this list.
The external evaluators should be, as far as possible, senior and established
scholars in a field appropriate to the materials being evaluated. They cannot be
the dissertation chair, the primary dissertation advisor, a personal friend, or a
collaborator on any publication or research effort of the evaluated library
faculty.
The external review report will be included in the WPAF as an integral part
of the evaluation process.
iv. The Library Evaluator and the Library Evaluation Committee must evaluate
each item in the area of research, scholarly, or creative contributions. They must
address the significance and quality of each contribution in relation to the form
in which the contribution is presented, e.g., a publication, a presentation, or a
work in progress. If a contribution consists of professional activity such as a
consultantship, participation in a professional organization, a grant, or an award,
the Library Evaluator and the Library Evaluation Committee must assess its
significance and relevance. If the Library Evaluator or the Library Evaluation
Committee finds any deficiencies in the library faculty member’s documentation
or has difficulty evaluating a particular item, they may request clarification,
expansion, or additional information from the library faculty member through
the FAD Office. If the evaluated library faculty member fails to provide the
requested information or documentation, the Library Evaluator or the
Library Evaluation Committee shall so indicate in their report.
v. The Library Evaluator, the Library Evaluation Committee, and the Library Dean
shall evaluate the library faculty member’s research, scholarly, or creative
contributions in the light of established criteria to determine appropriateness
and quality.

327

vii. The following list of research, scholarly, or creative contributions is
exemplary. It is not meant to be limiting, definitive, or rank-ordered for
importance. Work professionally evaluated by peers in the field is generally
considered to be more significant. Some items on this list may be more
appropriate to some library faculty than others. The individual’s contribution to
any collaborative activities must be clearly stated in the Joint Activity Report.
▪ Receipt of a fellowship, grant, contract, award, prize, or other
evidence of professional recognition.
▪ Active participation in seminars, conferences, meetings, or other
activity leading to research, scholarly, or creative contributions.
▪ Continuing education, retraining, and the development of new skills
relevant to one’s current or potential professional assignments.
Evidence of these activities may be the taking of courses, earning
advanced degrees, or participating in professional conferences,
seminars, workshops, institutes, or special programs which lead to
systematic updating of knowledge.
▪ Presentations at professional meetings.
▪ Publications such as books or texts (whole or parts thereof), articles
in periodicals such as scholarly journals, or any other type of
academically specialized form of output such as musical
performances, music scores, theatrical or media scripts, or
software. Professionally recognized or refereed publications are
generally considered to be more significant.
▪ Creative activity culminating in a public display or performance
such as might occur in music, art, drama, or poetry reading.
▪ Active leadership and/or service in recognized professional
societies (also relevant to service to the university and/or
community).
▪ Consultantships, whether paid or unpaid, of a professional nature.
▪ Editing, reviewing, indexing, abstracting, or performing other
editorial work for professional or scholarly publications.
▪ Any other items of specific professional activity, such as work in
progress.
c. Service to the University and/or Community: In addition to demonstrated
effectiveness in performance of professional assignments and continued research,
scholarly, or creative contributions, library faculty must also participate in professionally
related service to the university and/or community.

328

i. Scope of Service to the University and/or Community: Service activities relate
to the mission of the university and can bring recognition to the university but
also to the library faculty member. Service activities should be consistent with
the professional abilities, expertise, and/or leadership qualities of the evaluated
library faculty member. Library faculty are uniquely qualified to render service to
the university in a variety of ways such as participating in institutional
governance,evaluating the professional performance of their colleagues, and
sponsoring student organizations.
Communities served may be local, regional, state, national, international, or
professional. The goal is to foster an intellectual relationship with a community.
Service to the university and/or community shall be demonstrated by
documented evidence submitted with the FAR. Activities supported by
reassigned time shall be considered in evaluating the quantity but not the quality
of such work. The following list of examples is not meant to be exhaustive nor
are the items rank ordered for preference.
Service to the University
● Active participation in the governance of the CSUSB libraries, the CSUSB
campuses, and/or the CSU system.
● Attendance and active participation at all library meetings.
● Active participation on committees at all levels with emphasis on the CSUSB
levels while at the Senior Assistant Librarian rank.
● Participation in educational equity programs and activities.
● Authorship of documents, reports, or other materials pertinent to the
university’s mission and/or operation.
● Advisor or sponsor to student organizations or clubs on a CSUSB campus.
● Assisting with grants, documents, contracts, proposals, reports, or other
materials pertinent to the university’s mission and/or operation.
● Active participation in library, campus, and/or university-wide advisory groups.
Service to the Community
● Service in government at all levels.
● Consultantships with community service groups.
● Media presentations such as interviews, articles, speeches, or

329

other presentations in newspapers, magazines, radio, television,
or film.
● Lectures, speeches, talks, presentations, and/or displays given to
schools, community groups, or the university community.
● Judging at science fairs, art shows, or music contests.
● Active participation and/or office holding in civic, educational
service, and/or humanitarian groups.
● Participation in community partnership activities which enhance social,
economic, and/or cultural conditions.
ii. Evaluation of Service to the University and/or Community The library faculty member
shall describe and document service activities. Evidence may include, but shall not be
limited to, letters of invitation, memoranda, programs, membership lists, and other
appropriate items. This evidence shall be attached to the FAR. Additional supporting
evidence may be obtained from the Library Evaluator’s report.Evaluators evaluate the
nature of the service to the university and/or community and its appropriateness to the
library faculty’s rank.
2. Evaluation Rating System for Performance Reviews
a. Evaluation Scale
All evaluators shall apply the established criteria to the performance of the evaluated
library faculty member relative to their employment status at the time of evaluation.
For example, a rating of Above Expectations for retention at the rank of Senior Assistant
Librarian at the second year only means that the evaluated library faculty member is
deemed Above Expectations as a second-year probationary library faculty. It is not
indicative of their chances of being promoted or tenured.
Above Expectations: Above the range of the established criteria.
Meets Expectations: Within the range of the established criteria.
Below Expectations: Below the range of the established criteria.
Well Below Expectations: Well below the range of the established criteria.
b. Outcomes of Evaluation
i. Second-Year Retention Review: If the library faculty member is rated at least
Meets Expectations in two categories and no lower than Below Expectations in

330

the third, they will be recommended for retention at the rank of Senior Assistant
Librarian.
Ratings of Below Expectations in two areas and at least Meets Expectations in
the third also results in retention at the rank of Senior Assistant Librarian, but in
this case, the retention decision will include recommendations from the
President or designee for successful future evaluations.
If the library faculty member is rated Well Below Expectations in any of the three
areas, they will not be recommended for retention. If the library faculty member
is rated either Below Expectations or Well Below Expectations in all three areas,
they will not be recommended for retention.
ii. Fourth-Year Retention Review: Ratings of Meets Expectation or Above
Expectations in all three areas will result in a recommendation for retention at
the rank of Senior Assistant Librarian. If the evaluated library faculty member is
rated Below Expectations in any of the three areas and Meets Expectations (or
above) in the other two areas, they will be recommended for retention at the
rank of Senior Assistant Librarian, but in this case, the retention decision will
include recommendations from the President or designee for successful future
Evaluations.
If the evaluated library faculty member is rated Well Below Expectations in one
area or Below Expectations in two or more areas, they will not be recommended
for retention.
iii. Sixth-Year Tenure and Promotion to Associate Librarian: To be recommended
for tenure, the evaluated library faculty member must be rated at a minimum of
Meets Expectations in all three areas. Any lower rating shall not result in being
recommended for tenure.
To be recommended for promotion to the rank of Associate Librarian, the
evaluated library faculty member must be rated as Above Expectations in one of
the areas and as Meets Expectations or Above Expectations in the other two
areas at the rank of Senior Assistant Librarian. If the evaluated library faculty
member is rated at Below Expectations or Well Below Expectations in any of the
three areas, they will not be recommended for promotion to the rank of
Associate Librarian.

331

iv. Promotion to Librarian: To be recommended for promotion to Librarian, the
evaluated library faculty member must be rated at Above Expectations in one
area and Meets Expectations or Above Expectations in the other two areas at the
rank of Associate Librarian.
Application of Criteria and Rating System
General Provisions
Early tenure performance reviews use the same standards and criteria as those for regular
tenure performance reviews.
Early promotion performance reviews use the same standards and criteria as those for regular
promotion performance reviews.
In progressing through the ranks of Senior Assistant Librarian, Associate Librarian, and
Librarian, the library faculty being evaluated will be judged by an increasingly rigorous
application of the criteria.
1. Senior Assistant Librarian
Performance of Professional Assignments
Meets Expectations: During years two and three of the probationary period the Senior
Assistant Librarian must demonstrate command of professional Knowledge. Strong
indications of developing abilities must also be demonstrated in the other performance
of professional assignments criteria. In subsequent years, competence in the
appropriate professional assignments must be evident.
Above Expectations: The Senior Assistant Librarian must meet the requirements
for Meets Expectations and also provide a preponderance of evidence
demonstrating excellence in their performance of professional assignments.
Research, Scholarly, or Creative Contributions
Meets Expectations: During years two and three of the probationary period the Senior
Assistant Librarian must demonstrate involvement in research, scholarly, or creative

332

contributions. In subsequent years, continued active involvement in and successful
completion of some professionally evaluated activities should be evident.
Above Expectations: The Senior Assistant Librarian must meet the requirements for
Meets Expectations and also have attained recognition beyond the university for
research, scholarly, or creative contributions.
Service to the University and/or Community
Meets Expectations: The Senior Assistant Librarian should demonstrate a developing
level of participation in service, particularly at the library level. To receive tenure, the
Meets Expectations Senior Assistant Librarian must demonstrate significant
participation in the area of service.
Above Expectations: The Senior Assistant Librarian must meet the requirements for
Meets Expectations and also demonstrate unusual effectiveness or
performance as a contributor or leader in the university, the community, or both.
This record of exceptional service shall be clearly documented both quantitatively
and qualitatively.
2. Associate Librarian
Performance of Professional Assignments
Meets Expectations: The Associate Librarian must demonstrate proficiency in the
appropriate performance of professional assignments criteria.
Above Expectations: The Associate Librarian must meet the requirements for Meets
Expectations and also provide a preponderance of evidence demonstrating excellence in
the performance of professional assignments.
Research, Scholarly, or Creative Contributions
Meets Expectations: The Associate Librarian must demonstrate a record of active
involvement in and successful accomplishment of research, scholarly, or
creative contributions. Successful accomplishment at this level normally requires
some continued completion of professionally evaluated activities.

333

Above Expectations: The Associate Librarian must meet the requirements for
Meets Expectations and also have attained recognition beyond the university for
research, scholarly, or creative contributions.
Service to the University and/or Community
Meets Expectations: The Associate Librarian must demonstrate significant participation
in the area of service. For a library faculty member hired at this rank, Meets
Expectations may be assigned for demonstrating sufficient progress towards meeting
this standard by the third probationary year.
Above Expectations: The Associate Librarian must meet the requirements for Meets
Expectations and also demonstrate unusual effectiveness or performance as a
contributor or leader in the university, the community, or both. This record of
exceptional service shall be clearly documented both quantitatively and qualitatively.
3. Librarian
Performance of Professional Assignments
Meets Expectations: The Librarian must demonstrate proficiency in the appropriate
performance of professional assignments criteria and have a sustained record of
involvement and achievement indicative of a commitment and ability to continue at
that level.
Above Expectations: The Librarian must meet the requirements for Meets Expectations
and also provide a preponderance of evidence demonstrating excellence in the
performance of professional assignments.
Research, Scholarly, or Creative Contributions
Meets Expectations: The Librarian must demonstrate a record of successful
accomplishment and recognition in research, scholarly, or creative contributions.
Above Expectations: The Librarian must meet the requirements for Meets
Expectations and also have attained recognition beyond the university for research,
scholarly, or creative contributions.
Service to the University and/or Community

334

Meets Expectations: The Librarian is expected to provide effective leadership in some
service activities and demonstrate a sustained commitment to these leadership roles in
addition to significant participation in service activities.
Above Expectations: The Librarian must meet the requirements for Meets Expectations
and also demonstrate unusual effectiveness or performance as a contributor or leader
in the university, the community, or both. This record ofexceptional service shall be
clearly documented both quantitatively and qualitatively.
Periodic Evaluation of Tenured Library Faculty
1. Purpose:
The purpose of periodic evaluation of tenured library faculty members is to assure continued
excellence in the performance of professional assignments; research, scholarly, or creative
contributions; and service to the university and/or community. The process is intended to be
both positive and supportive.
2. Procedure
a. Tenured library faculty shall be subject to periodic evaluation at intervals of not more
than five years. Periodic evaluations shall be conducted by the Library Evaluator, the
Library Evaluation Committee, and the Library Dean.
b. Participants in the Faculty Early Retirement Program (FERP) shall not be required to
undergo periodic evaluation unless requested either by the FERP participant or an
appropriate administrator.
c. If more than 25% of the tenured library faculty are scheduled for periodic evaluation
at the same time, the Library Evaluation Committee may determine by a random
method a one-year postponement of some evaluations to reduce the number to less
than 25%. The random process shall be supervised by the chair of the Library Evaluation
Committee.
Also subject to periodic evaluation are tenured library faculty whose previous
evaluations resulted in a decision to review in less than five years.
d. The FAD Office sends out a call for FARs to the relevant library faculty with the due
date for submission. The date for this action and those that follow in the evaluation
cycle are taken from the current Timetable for Periodic Evaluation and Performance
Review of Library Faculty.

335

e. Library faculty complete their FARs and submit them to the FAD Office.
f. The Library Evaluator, the Library Evaluation Committee, and the Library Dean
evaluate the WPAFs in sequence, not concurrently. The FAD Office assembles the WPAF,
then notifies the Library Evaluator that it is ready for evaluation. Continuing on, the FAD
Office notifies each
succeeding level of evaluation when it is their turn according to the Timetable for
Periodic Evaluation and Performance Review of Library Faculty. Each of the three levels
above generates a report, which, when completed, is submitted to the FAD Office for
addition to the WPAF prior to the next level of evaluation. The FAD Office also sends a
copy of each report to the library faculty being evaluated who has ten calendar days
from their receipt of a report to respond or rebut in writing to the FAD Office. The due
dates for the reports are in the Timetable for Periodic Evaluation and Performance
Review of Library Faculty.
The FAD Office adds copies of any responses or rebuttals to the WPAF and shares copies
with all previous levels of evaluation.
3. Criteria: Tenured library faculty shall be evaluated in the areas of performance of
professional assignments; research, scholarly, or creative contributions; and
service to the university and/or community. The criteria are the same as those
for performance reviews.
4. Exclusion: Members of the Library Evaluation Committee are required to recuse
themselves from their own review. If, for this reason, a member of the Library
Evaluation Committee must withdraw, the library faculty being evaluated may
either give consent for the review to proceed with the remaining two members or
submit a name of a qualified person able to serve for this one evaluation to the
Library Dean for approval.
5. Delays in Review: It is recognized that unforeseen situations may warrant a delay
in periodic evaluation. Requests for a delay shall be made in writing clearly
stating reasons that must be serious and compelling. These requests must be
submitted to the Library Dean. Delays of more than one year may be granted by
the Library Dean in consultation with the Library Evaluation Committee in
exceptional circumstances, such as a multiyear leave of absence.
Guidelines

336

1. Overview: The library faculty have the option of preparing guidelines for application of
criteria in the three areas contained in this document. These written guidelines, while specific
to the profession of academic librarianship, must strictly conform to the university-wide
criteria. They are intended to provide guidance to library faculty on those activities and items
that tend to have greater applicability for academic librarianship.
These guidelines are not intended to supersede the listing of criteria contained in this
document nor to impose a professional technique and as such may not eliminate or exclude any
criterion listed in the areas of performance of professional assignments; research, scholarly, or
creative contributions; and service to the university and/or community.
2. General Requirements
a. Performance of Professional Assignments: Description in general terms of
professional techniques or approaches which are best suited to the CSUSB libraries.
b. Research, Scholarly, or Creative Contributions: The most appropriate professional
activities may be indicated, and suggestions given on how best to engage in them to
achieve professional accomplishments. Guidelines must avoid setting specific
quantitative goals since evaluators must evaluate both quantitative and qualitative
aspects of activities and achievements in this area. Additionally, strict rank ordering of
items shall be avoided, but clear identification of the most appropriate activities and
achievements is encouraged.
c. Service to the University and/or Community: Indicate the most appropriate activities
for library faculty.
3. Procedure for Approval of Guidelines
The Library Dean is responsible for ensuring that guidelines are developed or amended with the
full participation of all tenure-line library faculty. Guidelines and subsequent modifications must
receive, by secret ballot, approval from a majority of the library faculty and approved through
the normal Faculty Senate process, which will include a two-reading vote on the floor of the
Faculty Senate. Faculty Senate consideration shall be limited to determining whether the
proposed guidelines or subsequent modifications to existing guidelines are in line with the
criteria established in this document, including academic freedom in the area of research,
scholarly, or creative contributions. These guidelines are implemented in the following way.

337

a. Library faculty who were hired before the approval of the guidelines may opt to adopt
the guidelines or the university-wide criteria established in this document for their
evaluations.
b. Library faculty who are hired after the approval of the guidelines must be evaluated
according to them.
4. Distribution of Guidelines
The Library Evaluator is responsible for distributing copies of the guidelines in the fall semester
each year to library faculty who may be undergoing evaluation that year.
For new library faculty, the Library Evaluator shall provide a written copy of the guidelines and
meet with them to discuss the contents of the guidelines.

FAM 652.5
EVALUATION OF COACHING FACULTY
FAM 652.5 Evaluation of Coaching Faculty

Table of Contents
Table of Contents
Purpose and Scope
Procedures for Periodic Evaluation
Criteria for Periodic Evaluation
Approvals
History
Purpose and Scope
The purpose of this section is to specify the procedure and criteria to be used in the evaluation
of coaching faculty. Given their special employment status, coaching faculty are subjected only
to periodic evaluation, not performance review.
These departmental procedures augment campus evaluation procedures and conform to Article
15 of the Collective Bargaining Agreement (CBA) between California State University (CSU) and
the California Faculty Unit Employees. They also conform to the 2014- 2017 Coaches
Handbook published by the California Faculty Association.

338

Procedures for Periodic Evaluation
1. Preparation of a Coach's Activities Report
a. All coaches must prepare a Coach Activities Report (CAR), with supporting
documentation, and a self-evaluation, within thirty (30) days of the conclusion of the
championship season in their sport.
b. Head coaches will provide an assessment of the performance ofassistant coaches in
their sport for inclusion in the Working Personnel Action File (WPAF)
c. The CAR and the performance assessment of assistant coaches by head coaches will
be submitted to the Athletic Director and will be incorporated into the Working
Personnel Action file.
d. The WPAF will include the CAR, coach's evaluation form (for assistant coaches), peer
visitation reports, student opinions of coaching effectiveness and other relevant
materials.
2. Evaluation of a Coach's Performance
a. The evaluation of each coach's performance will be performed by the Coach
Evaluation Committee, the Athletic Director and the Vice President responsible for
Athletics.
b. These evaluations will be based on the materials in the coach's WPAF.
c. The coach will receive a written report at each step of the process.
3. The Coach Evaluation Committee
a. The Coach Evaluation Committee (CEC} shall be composed of the Faculty Athletics
Representative, a tenured faculty member from the Intercollegiate Athletics Advisory
Committee (IAAC}, selected by the committee, and one additional tenured faculty
member, nominated by the coaches and approved by the Vice President in charge of
Athletics.
b. The Coach's Evaluation Committee will review the WPAF and forward its report
within thirty {30) days to the Director of Athletics, with a copy to the coach.
c. The criteria for the assessment of the coach's performance are listed in Section II.
d. The coach will have ten days to submit a response/rebuttal to this report. Any
response/rebuttal will be added to the WPAF.
4. Athletic Director
a. The Athletic Director will review the WPAF and the consider the advice of the CEC in
formulating his/her evaluation.

339

b. The Director of Athletics will complete the Coach Evaluation Form, with any
recommended corrective action, within thirty (30) days.
c. This report will be added to the WPAF with a copy forwarded to the coach.
d. The coach will have ten (10) days to submit a response/rebuttal to this report. Any
response/rebuttal will be added to the WPAF.
e. When a coach has reached the service step maximum of a salary range, the Director
of Athletics shall submit a recommendation to the Vice President for Athletics
regarding movement to a higher salary range.
5. Vice President in Charge of Athletics
a. The Vice President in charge of Athletics will review the WPAF, considering the
advice of CEC and the Director of Athletics, and reach a decision about evaluation.
b. The decision of the Vice President in charge of Athletics shall be communicated to
the coach, in writing, within thirty {30) days, stating the reasons for the decision and
any expected actions on part of the coach.
c. The coach will have ten (10) days to submit a response/rebuttal to this report. Any
response/rebuttal should be submitted to Academic Personnel and will be added to
the Personnel Action File (PAF).
Criteria for Periodic Evaluation
1. Overall team performance
Coaches are expected to develop and maintain competitive athletic teams. Team
performance shall be evaluated in relation to the resources that are available to the
program, e.g., scholarship dollars, operating budgets, coach's time base; and the level of
ability of those against whom the University competes, e.g. strength of conference.
2. Recruiting
Coaches are expected to recruit student-athletes who will be strong representatives of
the program and who have been recruited from the widest geographical area within the
region. Recruitment shall be evaluated in relation to the amount of resources that are
available to the program, e.g. scholarship dollars, operating budgets, coach's time base.
Coaches are also expected to show good judgment in the distribution of athleticallyrelated aid, while exploring all options for other financial aid.
3. Compliance with NCAA and conference rules
Coaches are expected to perform within the rules and regulations of the NCAA and the

340

Conference Office. Consistent secondary violations and/or major violations of NCAA and
Conference rules may result in disciplinary action in accordance with the applicable
collective bargaining agreement.
4. Fundraising and community service
Coaches are expected to develop a circle of support within the campus and community
leading eventually to the creation of a booster club. Coaches are expected to help
market the program, increase attendance at games and matches, and develop and/or
participate in fundraising activities for the purpose of increasing scholarships and

Evaluation of Coaching Faculty
obtaining funds for additional operating expenses. Fundraising and community service shall be
evaluated in relation to the amount of resources that are available to the
program and the coach's time base.
Coaches are also required to engage in and encourage their athletes to be involved in
community service activities.
5. Student-athlete well-being
Coaches are required to facilitate a safe and welcoming environment for student- athletes.
Student-athletes must be able to be involved in reasonable and responsible campus social
activities available to all students and that fit within the team rules for conduct.
6. Team academic performance student-athlete academic performance and retention
Coaches are required to help maintain the academic eligibility of student-athletes by providing
them with guidance towards satisfactory academic progress and ultimately completion of
degree programs.
To the extent possible, coaches are also expected to help retain student-athletes with
remaining eligibility.
7. Administrative assignments
Coaches are expected to comply with administrator requests designed to advance the mission
of their program or the athletic department. Coaches are expected to understand and complete
all required NCAA, Conference, and University paperwork in a timely manner and are expected
to understand and operate within budgetary allocations. Administrative assignments shall be
evaluated in relation to the amount of resources that are available to the program and the
coach's time base.

341

8. Ethical conduct
Coaches are expected to conduct themselves and their programs with honesty, sportsmanship,
honor and dignity as outlined in NCAA Bylaw 10 on ethical conduct.

ELECTION OF DEPARTMENT EVALUATION COMMITTEES
FAM 652.6
Purpose and Scope
This policy sets forth provisions regarding the election of the Department Evaluation
Committee. The
functions and other aspects of the said committee are specified in appropriate places in FAM
651.1:
Evaluation of Tenure-Line Faculty.
Definition
The term department used in this document refers to an academic unit in an academic college
that
houses faculty and offers academic programs to students. It includes both departments and
schools
(e.g. School of Computer Science and Engineering and School of Social Work).
Consequently, the term department chair is used to refer to both department chair and school
director;
the term Department Evaluation Committee refers to both Department Evaluation Committee
and School
Evaluation Committee.
The California State University • Bakersfield • Chanr,el Islands • Chico • Dominguez Hills • East
Bay • Fresno • Fullerton • Humboldt • Long Beach • Los Angeles
Maritime Academy. Monterey Bay , Nort-hr.idge • Pomona •Sacramento• SAN BE.RNA RD I NO
• San Diego • San Francisco • San Jose • San Luis Obispo• San Marcos· Sonoma • Stanislaus
Policy statement
FAM 652.6; 2023
Department Evaluation Committee

342

Peer review lies at the heart of evaluation in academia. In the CSUSB's RPT process, the
responsibility of
peer review rests with the Department Evaluation Committee. As such, the election of the
Department
Evaluation Committee should be conducted with utmost integrity.
A Department Evaluation Committee shall normally be composed of three tenured faculty. In
departments with many evaluations to conduct, the department may vote to increase the size
of
the DEC to as many as five members. One member may be an Associate Professor who is not
undergoing performance review, and the remaining members must be Professors. Associate
Professors must recuse themselves from cases involving promotion to Professor (see CBA
Article
15.43). If a recusal results in a committee with fewer than three members, the department shall
elect a Professor to serve as an alternate committee member. Eligible faculty who are
undergoing
periodic evaluation may serve on the committee but must recuse themselves from their own
evaluation. The Department Chair may not serve on this committee. The committee shall elect
its
chair who must hold the rank of Professor. The committee serves a one-year term, elected
annually from within the department or from related academic disciplines.
It is the responsibility of the department chair to initiate and supervise the process for the
election of the
Department Evaluation Committee. Questions on procedures and eligibility shall be addressed
to the
College Elections Officer, who may consult with the Office of Faculty Affairs and Development
or the
Executive Committee of the Faculty Senate as needed. Election challenges concerning violation
of
procedure shall be adjudicated by the University Elections Committee.
Procedures for Election(s)
1. All elections described here shall follow the procedures in the Bylaws of the Faculty Senate,
Article II, Section 3.). College elections officers are available to provide guidance to
departments
on election procedures.
2. At the start of each academic year, before nominations of DEC members occur, any
departmental
tenure-line faculty member may request in writing that the DEC should consist of up to five

343

members rather than the default three members. If such a request is made, the tenure-line
faculty in the department shall conduct an anonymous election to determine the number of
DEC
members.
3. The department chair shall call for nominations for the positions on the Department
Evaluation
Committee. Only tenure-line faculty within the Department are eligible to make nominations.
There is no limit to the number of nominations a faculty member may make but each
nomination must be verified as coming from a tenure-line faculty member in the department.
Nominees
must be tenured Professors or Associate Professors. Faculty in the Faculty Early Retirement
Program are eligible to serve on a Departmental Evaluation Committee if (a) the period of
active
employment spans the period of the Committee's work, and (b) the appointment is approved
by
the College Dean. However, evaluation committees may not be comprised solely of faculty
participating in the Faculty Early Retirement Program. Although faculty on sabbatical or
difference-in-pay leaves are under no obligation whatsoever to perform departmental/school
service during their leaves, they are eligible to serve on their department's/school's evaluation
committee if they freely choose to do so (without undue pressure or solicitation by their
colleagues) and, in addition, agree to review the files for all review cycles and to attend all
meetings throughout the entire academic year, including cycles and meetings that occur during
the time they are on leave. Nominees must be from within the Department or from a related
academic discipline. Standard nominating forms shall be used. (See Attachment A).
4. Members of a Department Evaluation Committee cannot concurrently serve on the College
Evaluation Committee or the University Evaluation Committee. They may, however, be elected
to
other departmental evaluation committees. Department Evaluation Committee members who
are undergoing a Periodic Evaluation may serve on the Department Evaluation Committee but
must recuse themselves when they are being evaluated. Also, department chairs cannot serve
on
the evaluation committee within their own Department but may be elected to other
department
committees.
5. What constitutes a related discipline is to be determined by the tenure-line faculty of the
Department.
6. If a recusal results in fewer than three committee members, the department shall conduct an
anonymous vote for a Professor to serve as an alternate committee member.

344

7. If fewer nominations are received than positions available, nominations shall automatically
be
extended for a period of three days to allow for additional nominations. All members of the
Department shall be informed in writing of this extension. If there are still fewer nominations
than positions, an election shall be held for the nominees available and then the vacancy filled
by
starting a new election at Step 3, above.
8. The nominating period shall extend for five working days after the day that the call for
nominations is distributed to faculty. The departmental tenure-line faculty shall be notified via
email or some other secure method of the list of nominees three (3) days before the
distribution
of ballots.
9. Only tenure-line faculty within the Department may vote in Department evaluation
committee
elections. This includes department chairs and others who are appointed to administrative
positions but remain in the employment status of faculty (Unit-Three).
10. Ballots shall be distributed within three working days after nominations close, using the
normal
Senate procedures (See Bylaws of the Faculty Senate, Article II, Section 3) for confidential
voting.
Ballots must be received by the Department office no later than four working days after they
are
distributed to faculty.
11. Ballots shall be prepared and tallied as follows:
a. The name of every eligible nominee shall be placed on the ballot.
b. If there are more qualified candidates than positions, a ratification/election ballot shall be
used (Attachment B). Otherwise, only a ratification ballot will be needed (Attachment C),
except for the following special case. If there are more candidates than positions, if no
associate professor is currently on the committee and if the number of professor candidates is
less than the number of positions, then a ratification ballot shall be used for the professor
candidates and a ratification/election ballot used for the associate professor candidates.
c. Ballots shall be opened and counted by the department chair and the college elections
officer (or designee for the latter).
d. Whenever there is one candidate per position, a candidate is ratified upon receiving a
majority
of the "acceptable" votes among the valid ballots cast. At this point the election is over. If any
positions remain unfilled (due to candidates not being ratified), then a new election will be
called to fill those remaining vacant positions.

345

e. For ratification/election ballots, evaluate ratification first. A candidate is ratified upon
receiving
a majority of the "acceptable" votes among the valid ballots cast. Candidates not ratified are
disqualified from the preferential count. Preferential votes are tallied according to the ballot
procedure as described in the Bylaws of the Faculty Senate, Article II, Section 3.G). Once one
associate professor has been elected, all additional associate professors shall be deemed
ineligible for the remaining positions. If the election results in a committee composed entirely
of faculty in the Faculty Early Retirement Program, the last FER Per elected shall be removed
and
one more committee member shall be elected from among the remaining candidates who are
not participating in the Faculty Early Retirement Program.

12. If, for any reason, a Department Evaluation Committee does not have at least three
members who meet the criteria, the department chair should work to nominate other qualified
nominees from related departments. If a Department Evaluation Committee does not have at
least three members, and an evaluation deadline is imminent, it shall complete the evaluation
with its two available members. A special election shall be held at the earliest opportunity to fill
in the missing position(s).
13. All members of the Department are to be notified in writing or electronically of the
outcome of each election. The department chair shall send the results of the election to the
College Office, the Faculty Senate Office and the Office of Faculty Affairs and Development.
14. All election materials shall be retained by the department for 30 calendar days after ballots
have been counted. These materials shall be available for inspection. To be valid, election
challenges must be filed in writing with the University Elections Committee within five working
days from the date that the election results are distributed to faculty.
Attachment A
DEPARTMENT EVALUATION COMMITTEE NOMINATION
FORM DEPARTMENT OF____________________
[Note: Only tenure-line faculty at the rank of Professor or Associate Professor (not under
consideration for promotion during the academic year) are eligible to be nominated. No
department chair may be nominated for the department evaluation committee within their
department. No member of the University Evaluation Committee is eligible to serve on a
department evaluation committee. No member of a college evaluation committee is eligible to
serve on a department evaluation committee within their college. Faculty in the Faculty Early

346

Retirement Program are eligible to serve on a Departmental Evaluation Committee if (a) the
period of active employment is two semesters of the academic year and (b) the appointment is
approved by the College Dean.]
___________________________________
Printed name of person being nominated
__________________________________
Signature of person being nominated
(This signature indicates a willingness to accept the nomination.)
Date

Attachment B
DEPARTMENT EVALUATION COMMITTEE ELECTION BALLOT
DEPARTMENT OF_____________________________________
The persons below were nominated to serve on the Department Evaluation Committee. There
are ___openings on this committee. This is a two-part ballot, both parts need to be completed.
1. In the ACCEPTABILITY columns, please mark either "acceptable" or "unacceptable."
Failure to vote on acceptability will have the same effect as voting "unacceptable."
2. In the RANK column, please rank order all candidates (including those marked
unacceptable) by marking "1" by the name of your 1st choice (most preferred)
candidate, "2" by the name of your 2nd choice candidate, "3" by the name of your 3rd
choice candidate, and so on. Make sure all candidates are ranked. Incomplete ranking
will render
your ballot invalid.
[Note: Only tenure-line faculty are eligible to vote.]

347

ACCESABILITY
Acceptable

Unaccptable

RANK
Vote

Candidate

Attachment C
DEPARTMENT EVALUATION COMMITTEE RATIFICATION BALLOT
DEPARTMENT OF________________________________
The persons below were nominated to serve on the Department Evaluation Committee. They
are unopposed for the position(s). Please vote on ratification for each of these candidates by
marking in either the "acceptable" or "unacceptable" space next to each candidate. Failure to
vote for a candidate will have the same effect as voting "unacceptable."
[Note: Only tenure-line faculty are eligible to vote.]
ACCEPTABILITY
Acceptable

Unacceptable

Candidate

APPROVALS

348

FAM 651.570
CSUSB MSPA Program Retention, Promotion,
and Tenure (RPT) Guidelines
FAM 652.570 MSPA Program RPT Guidelines

I. PREAMBLE
The purpose of these guidelines is to assist faculty in understanding the expectations in the
retention, promotion, and tenure process as deemed appropriate in the specific discipline and
context of the Master of Science in Physician Assistant (MSPA) Program at CSUSB. Throughout
these guidelines, you will find categories describing and providing examples of evidence that
would demonstrate work in each related area being evaluated. If an issue is not addressed in
this document, the faculty should refer to the university FAM 652.1.
A. Note to Faculty
1. It is the faculty’s primary responsibility to provide a clear faculty activity report (FAR) and
provide evidence of all activities in each section (Appendix B).
2. If the faculty are collaborating on an activity with anyone else, a joint activity report (JAR) is
required to be submitted as evidence of the faculty's contribution to the activity (Appendix
C).
3. If a faculty member is granted credit for prior years of higher education service in their hiring
contract, the faculty member must submit the approval of this credit as part of the evaluation
process. If a faculty member is granted up to two years of service credit, any scholarly work
completed prior to hiring within that time period (e.g., two years) can be included as part of
the requirements for the retention, promotion, and tenure process. It is the faculty member’s
responsibility to make it clear how many years were granted, any scholarly activities that
occurred in those years, and provide evidence for those scholarly activities.
4. If an activity overlaps multiple sections, faculty should justify where they want that activity to
be recognized and provide evidence in that particular section. Faculty should not put one
distinct activity in multiple sections. For example, faculty should count the activity class
coordinator as teaching, leadership, or service to the department.
5. If applicable, the faculty should make it extremely clear which Departmental Guidelines FAM
they were hired under or agreed to upgrade to a newer version. It is highly recommended
Updated: 05.03.2024 Page | 2
CSUSB MSPA Program; 2024
Retention, Promotion, and Tenure (RPT) Guidelines
that faculty state this at the top of their FAR and link the Department Guidelines that are

349

relevant.
B. Note to Evaluators
1. Faculty in the MSPA program are 12-month faculty and therefore are required to work during
the summer term as part of their yearly workload. This may result in workload differences
compared to academic year faculty.
2. Evaluators are recommended to use the MSPA-specific evaluation form that aligns with this
document.
3. If a faculty member has been granted credit for prior years of higher education service,
evaluators should acknowledge service credit in retention, promotion, and tenure
evaluations by reviewing faculty-provided evidence of granted service credit and scholarly
activities occurring within the designated time.
4. Evaluators should be aware that faculty may follow different Departmental Guidelines
depending on when they were hired, please follow the Departmental Guidelines that the
faculty has listed in their FAR.
5. Point of Information: Student opinions/evaluations, regardless of whether they are
quantitative or qualitative, are inherently biased and may have biases founded in gender,
1 nonverbal behavior, or physical appearance,
2 sexual orientation,
3 or race.
4 As such, these
types of evaluation instruments may be discriminatory. The MSPA program recognizes that
student evaluations are an instrument of evaluation officially mandated by the Collective
Bargaining Agreement between the California Faculty Association and the California State
University and that it is important for student voices to be heard. Nonetheless, we are
cognizant of the severe shortcomings of student evaluations, and we believe that the
evaluator should be made aware of these biases.
II. TEACHING
Teaching effectiveness is primarily assessed via collegial evaluation of classroom teaching and
examination of student feedback surveys. Teaching effectiveness will also be assessed by
examining relevant course materials that clearly demonstrate effective teaching and student
learning. Observations of teaching can come from traditional classroom visitations, but guest
lecturing and team teaching with written observations will also be considered. When a
teaching-related activity is done in conjunction with other individuals, a JAR must be submitted
as it is a clear indicator of the amount of contribution that was undertaken.
If a faculty member has a pattern of unfavorable reviews from either colleagues or students, it
is
imperative that the faculty member provides context for those reviews and outlines a plan for

350

improvement. Please note that a "pattern" generally involves repetitive action, a task, or
behavior engaged in frequently. A pattern of unfavorable reviews related to teaching,
instruction, and course management may include (but is not limited to) student comments
within a single course, multiple courses per semester or academic year, or each time a course is
taught. Teaching effectiveness is evaluated by evidence of activities in three categories.
Definitions and examples of the categories are listed below.
A. Category 1 – Essential Teaching Activities
Essential Teaching Activities represent the teaching-related activities that are necessary for the
MSPA program to function and are expected of all tenure-track faculty members. All essential
teaching-related activities should be documented in the FAR and evidence should be provided
when available. Please reference the MSPA Workload Policy in Appendix A.
Tenure-track faculty members are expected to perform ALL the following activities:
● Implement and communicate MSPA program-approved program learning outcomes,
course learning outcomes, course objectives, policies, and grading criteria in all classes;
● Utilize course design, materials, and practices that indicate responsible fulfillment of
classroom duties and currency in the field;
● Demonstrate evidence of student success in achieving learning outcomes set for the
course by the University and the program;
● Demonstrate evidence of teaching effectiveness in the classroom based on peer
evaluations by colleagues;
● Demonstrate knowledge and command of appropriate levels of educational
technology for assigned courses;
● Provide availability to students for academic counseling through regular office hours
(as described in the University Policies) and/or scheduled appointments;
● Assure the availability of remedial instruction for students as appropriate.
B. Category 2 – Indicators of Teaching Effectiveness
Indicators of Teaching Effectiveness represent teaching effectiveness in MSPA program courses
that should be documented in the FAR and evidence should be provided when available. ALL of
the following elements are expected to demonstrate teaching effectiveness:
● Support for a diverse and inclusive learning environment as demonstrated by the use
of varied means of assessment, multicultural content, and/or responsive teaching
strategies;
● Receiving a pattern of favorable comments and student ratings. The evaluator should
consider the class modality, number of credit hours, and complexity of the course
content/assessments;

351

● In the event of a pattern of unfavorable comments and/or ratings, the
candidate is expected to provide an explanation regarding these ratings
and/or a plan for future changes.
● Participation in activities designed to enhance the candidate’s teaching effectiveness,
including (but not limited to) on-campus or off-campus conferences, workshops, etc.;
● Continuous review and modifications of course content to meet changing curricular
needs for the discipline or profession as needed. Course content is relevant, timely, and
has salient issues clearly identified.
C. Category 3 – Indicators of Teaching Excellence
Indicators of Teaching Excellence represent teaching-related activities that demonstrate
excellence in teaching effectiveness and teaching-related leadership activities. If teaching
occurs outside of the classroom (e.g., mentoring in clinical, research, or service activities), it
should be mentioned in this section and not in other respective sections.
The following elements are considered indicators of teaching excellence:
● Leadership roles in teaching (e.g., course director);
● Evidence of a rigorous, thoughtful, and dynamic approach to the teaching/learning
process;
● Efforts to improve and adapt teaching with innovative methods, such as developing
original content or the use of active learning strategies (e.g., case studies or
simulations);
● Invited to provide instruction to external departments or institutions due to subject
matter
expertise (e.g., clinical expertise; public health; PA program administration, etc.);
● Developing and implementing new/innovative courses or teaching methodologies
(within
existing courses);
● Conducting workshops or seminars that enhance teaching within the department,
college, or profession;
● Receiving a student group, college, university, or discipline-based teaching/faculty
award.
D. Table 1 – Teaching Ratings and Activity Requirements
The table below outlines the minimum activity requirements for each rating (i.e., Above
Expectations, Meets Expectations, Below Expectations, Well Below Expectations) in Teaching
for retention, promotion, and tenure. It is the faculty’s primary responsibility to outline their
teaching-related activities in all categories in their FAR document. Table 1 should be used in
conjunction with FAM 652.1 to understand teaching ratings for retention, as well as tenure and
promotion to Associate and Full Professor.

352

Table 1. Teaching Ratings and Activity Requirements
Rating Activity Requirements
Above Expectations ● Category 1,
● All of Category 2, and
● Some of Category 3
Meets Expectations ● Category 1, and
● All of Category 2
Below Expectations ● Category 1, and
● Some of Category 2
Well Below
Expectations
● Category 1 only
In order to receive an Above Expectations rating for tenure and promotion, one should
normally have served as the instructor of record for a minimum of 120 weighted teaching units
Updated: 05.03.2024 Page | 5
CSUSB MSPA Program; 2024
Retention, Promotion, and Tenure (RPT) Guidelines
(WTUs) for tenure and a minimum of 90 WTUs for promotion. (Note: a full load is 150 WTUs
across 5 years of teaching.) If service credit is granted at hire, the minimum WTU requirement is
decreased for each year of service credit based on the faculty member’s defined full
instructional load (up to 30 WTUs per year).
For MSPA faculty with an additional focus (e.g., Admissions and Student Success), the
minimum WTUs for tenure and promotion are decreased based on the reassigned time
received
for program-specific administrative responsibilities. For example, a faculty member with a
specific focus may have 2 WTUs per semester reassigned. Therefore, a full instructional load for
this faculty member would be 24 WTUs per year instead of 30 WTUs per year.
Any type of leave of absence (e.g., medical leave, sabbatical) should be explained and noted in
the faculty’s FAR document.
III. RESEARCH, SCHOLARSHIP, AND CREATIVE
ACTIVITIES
Tenure-track faculty in the MSPA Program are required to contribute to discipline-specific
scholarly work. Research activities can have a range of involvement, such as a single-author

353

publication representing a complete and total effort towards the research activity. However,
many research activities are done collaboratively. Collaborative research is critical, but the
proportion of work conducted in those research activities varies significantly. In order to
understand the amount of work done by the scholar, it is critical that faculty include Joint
Activity Reports (JARs) with each research, scholarly, or creative activity that is submitted in a
FAR. Scholarship can also come in many different forms and may have different methodologies.
In 1990, Boyer outlined an academic model which advocated for four types of scholarship.
5 Until that time, traditional scholarship, referred to as scholarship of discovery, had been the
center of academic life. Boyer argued for the academy to broaden its definition of scholarship in
order to reward faculty for work they do outside of the narrower conventional boundaries of
research, teaching, and service.
Therefore, Boyer defined scholarly work into four categories as seen in the table below.

Type of Scholarship Definition
Scholarship of Discovery
● Search for new knowledge
● Discovery of new information and new models
● Sharing discoveries through scholarly publication
Scholarship of Integration
● Integration of knowledge from different sources
● Presents an overview of findings in a resource topic
● Bringing findings together from different disciplines to discover
convergence.
● Identify trends and see knowledge in new ways.
Scholarship of Application
● Discovering ways for new knowledge to be used to solve real-world problems.
Scholarship of Teaching
● Involves the search for innovative approaches and best practices to
develop skills and disseminate knowledge.
● Informal or formal teaching, advising, and mentoring

354

Using rationale provided by Boyer, the MSPA program created a list of activities that are
specific
to the PA profession. For example, the MSPA program considers clinical practice to be an
example of scholarship of application.
Research, Scholarship, and/or Creative Activities are evaluated by evidence of activities in three
categories. Definitions and examples of each category are listed below. If faculty believe that an
applicable research, scholarship, or creative activity is not listed below, they must make a
strong
case why the evidence belongs in this section of the FAR and in what category it belongs.
A. Category 1 – Essential Research, Scholarship, and/or Creative
Activities
Essential Research, Scholarship, and/or Creative Activities represent the activities that are
expected of all tenure-track faculty members. All essential research should be documented in
the FAR and evidence should be provided when available. For the MSPA program, research
activities may include clinical or higher education topics. The following activities are considered
indicators of essential research, scholarships, and/or creative activities:
● IRB application or IRB approval;
● Study proposal;
● Workshops related to research;
● Conference research presentation;
● Peer-reviewed journal article and/or case report;
● Clinical practice resulting in peer-reviewed, practice-based, or health-system clinical
practice guidelines;
● Peer reviewed grants;
● Peer-reviewed book or book chapters;
● Peer-reviewed authorship of print, electronic, or multimedia instructional or assessment
materials;
● Attainment of a graduate degree directly relevant to the PA profession (e.g., PhD, EdD,
DMSc). (It is the responsibility of the faculty member to establish relevance of the
graduate degree to the PA profession. The relevance would be collectively evaluated by
the MSPA Program Director and the RPT review committees.)
B. Category 2 – Indicators of Sustained Research, Scholarship, and/or

355

Creative Activities
Indicators of Sustained Research, Scholarship, and/or Creative Activities represent indicators of
sustained research activities within the faculty’s sub-discipline.
All activities should be documented in the FAR and evidence should be provided. If a
Updated: 05.03.2024 Page | 7
CSUSB MSPA Program; 2024
Retention, Promotion, and Tenure (RPT) Guidelines
faculty member presents at a conference and the abstract is published as part of the
conference proceedings, that research output counts as one piece of evidence in
Category 2.
The following activities are considered indicators of sustained research, scholarships, and/or
creative activities:
● Publishing a book review, review essay, technical report, encyclopedia entry,
peer-reviewed research abstract, or scholarly web-based commentary or podcast in a
relevant area;
● Receiving an externally funded grant or contract in support of original research, program
development, and/or professional development (<$10,000);
● Participating in academic conferences or forums by presenting original work, workshops,
or acting as a discussant on a panel or roundtable;
● Delivering an invited lecture on scholarly work;
● Developing and submitting an unfunded external grant that is >$10,000;
● Receiving positive reviews from journal reviewers on a peer-reviewed manuscript that
has not yet been accepted or published;
● Receiving funded internal (CSUSB) research-related grants or contracts (except travel
grants);
● Organizing a scholarly conference;
● Attending grant or research-related workshops;
● Non-published abstracts and/or case reports where students are the primary author;
● Non-peer reviewed publication, media contributions, presentations, abstracts, grants,
etc.;
● Invited commentary or editorials;
● Professional development activities related to scholarship – e.g., additional degrees
(e.g., MPH), certifications (e.g., Certificate of Added Qualifications [CAQ], global health
certificate, disaster preparedness), conferences (e.g., Association of American Medical
Colleges [AAMC] Medical Education Research Certification workshops);

356

● Serving as journal, department, or journal feature editor;
● Serving on editorial board;
● Committee work which results in development of state or national level curricula
standards or assessment;
● Obtaining continuing medical education credits for maintenance of certification and/or
recertification through National Commission on Certification of Physician Assistants
(NCCPA), including Category 1 credits, Physician Assistant National Recertifying
Examination (PANRE), and PANRE Longitudinal Assessment (PANRE-LA);
● Committee work which helps shape local, regional, state, and national policy and
involves the analysis of data and application of that analysis to advance the goals of the
profession, improve PA education, and/or patient care;
● Accreditation activities related to obtaining or maintaining professional accreditation;
● Clinical Practice;
o Defined as non-peer-reviewed scholarship of application that follows an
evidence-based approach.
● Consulting activities in the field that directly relates to the intellectual work of the faculty
member. The end product is disseminated in an academic fashion;
Updated: 05.03.2024 Page | 8
CSUSB MSPA Program; 2024
Retention, Promotion, and Tenure (RPT) Guidelines
● Support or development of community activities that link with academic discipline;
● Formal development and/or oversight of practica or partnerships for the program’s
students (beyond established curriculum);
● Technical, procedural, or practical innovations made clinically or professionally;
● Publication of innovative teaching materials, textbooks, and strategies.
C. Category 3 – Indicators of Sustained Excellence in Research,
Scholarship, and/or Creative Activities
Indicators of Sustained Excellence in Research, Scholarship, and/or Creative Activities
represent indicators of sustained excellence in research activities within the faculty’s
sub-discipline. All activities should be documented in the FAR and evidence should be provided.
● Publishing, or having been accepted for publication, a manuscript in a peer-reviewed
publication, such as a journal article or a scholarly book chapter. Evaluators should
consider both the quantity and quality;
● Publishing, or having accepted for publication, a scholarly endeavor, such as a
peer-reviewed and discipline-specific book or textbook;

357

● Presenting original work at external international, national, or regional conferences,
workshops, or forums as a keynote speaker, invited research talk, or another substantial
type of research talk;
● Receiving a significant (≥$10,000) externally funded grant or contract in support of
original research, program enhancements, and/or professional development;
● Awards related to research (college, university, or professional organization).
D. Table 2 – Research, Scholarship, and Creative Activities Ratings
and Activity Requirements
The table below outlines suggested annual scholarship activity, as well as requirements for
tenure and promotion. It is the faculty’s primary responsibility to outline their scholarship
activities in all categories in their FAR document. The Suggested Annual Activity column
describes the minimum suggested annual activity in each category by rating per year. The Total
for Tenure and Promotion section describes the minimum scholarship activities in each
category
by rating when applying for tenure and/or promotion. If more than the minimum scholarship
activities are completed in a higher category, they can count toward a lower category (ONE
Category 3 = TWO Category 2).
A minimum combination of activities required for the achievement of Above Expectations,
Meets
Expectations, Below Expectations, or Well Below Expectations in Research, Scholarship, and/or
Creative Activities for Retention, Promotion, and Tenure is listed below. The same
requirements
apply for promotion to Associate Professor and Full Professor considering a six-year time frame.
If promotion to Full Professor takes longer than six years, then the same requirements in Total
for Tenure and Promotion amount of work remains the same.
Table 2. Research, Scholarship, and Creative Activities Ratings and Activity Requirements
Updated: 05.03.2024 Page | 9
CSUSB MSPA Program; 2024
Retention, Promotion, and Tenure (RPT) Guidelines
Rating Suggested Annual Activity Total for Tenure and
Promotion
Above Expectations ● Category 1 – minimum of
1 activity
● Category 2 – minimum of 2-3 activities

358

● Category 3 – minimum of 1 activity
+
● Category 1 – continuous
● Category 2 – minimum of
12 activities
● Category 3 – minimum of 3 activities
Meets Expectations
● Category 1 – minimum of 1 activity
● Category 2 – minimum of 1-2 activities
● Category 3 – minimum of 1 activity
● Category 1 – continuous
● Category 2 – minimum of 8 activities
● Category 3 – minimum of 2 activities
Below Expectations
● Category 1 – continuous
● Category 2 – less than 8 activities
Well Below Expectations
● Category 1 – continuous
Indicates suggested activity may be completed annually or every other year to meet total
requirement.
Please note: If a faculty member is the main supervisor for a CSUSB student on a
peer-reviewed research article or lead investigator on an externally funded project, the faculty
member/lead investigator may get credit as if it were a first-author publication.
IV. SERVICE
Tenure-track faculty in the MSPA program must demonstrate evidence of contributions to the
department, college, university, discipline, profession, and community beyond the university.
They are expected to maintain a consistent pattern of regular service-related activity across the
period of review.
Faculty are expected to contribute and be actively involved in all categories as they
demonstrate
an ongoing commitment to service. Candidates undergoing the RPT process must be able to list

359

and describe all service activities from the categories.
Since service activities often vary in the amount of contribution and impact, faculty members
must provide evidence (e.g., thank you letters, certificates of appreciation, email evidence with
a clear acknowledgment of the work, etc.) and a short description of the service-related activity
in the FAR. When a service-related activity is done in conjunction with other individuals, a JAR
must be submitted as it is a clear indicator of the amount of contribution that was undertaken.
Depending on the amount of contribution associated with the service activity, the FAR
CSUSB MSPA Program; 2024
Retention, Promotion, and Tenure (RPT) Guidelines
description and/or JAR could provide evidence about which category the activity belongs in.
Faculty members should be explicitly clear about the amount of contribution and impact the
service activity has when composing their FAR.
Service Activities are evaluated by evidence of activities in four categories. Definitions and
examples of each category are listed below. If faculty believe that an applicable service activity
is not listed below, they must make a strong case why the evidence belongs in this section of
the FAR and in what category it belongs. Additional service activities in Category 4 can be used
to take the place of requirements from Category 3. However, additional activities from
Category
3 are not able to offset deficiencies in activities from Category 4.
A. Category 1 – Essential Service Activities
Essential Service Activities represent the service-related activities that are necessary for the
department to function and are expected of all tenure-track faculty members. All essential
services should be documented in the FAR and documentation should be provided when
available. Evidence provided in categories 2, 3, or 4 may be evidence for category 1 and be
counted in both sections.
● Regular participation in department meetings;
● Contributing to activities that uphold the department function (e.g., admissions
outreach, reviews, and interviews);
● Consistent participation in collaborative teaching (e.g., physical examination, clinical
and technical skills, etc.) and assessment activities (e.g., interprofessional experiences,
OSCEs, simulation, Summative Evaluation, etc.) unless granted formal exemption by the
Program Director based on operational needs each semester;
● Collaborating with colleagues within the department to contribute to activities that
uphold the department;
● Serving on a committee for at least one function of the department (e.g., MSPA

360

Curriculum Committee, MSPA Assessment Committee, etc.);
● Attending and contributing to important program and university events, such as white
coat ceremony, awards, convocation, and commencement;
● Completing faculty classroom visitations and writing reports;
● Serving as a search committee member for search committees within the program;
● Supporting student success (e.g., recommendation letters, academic and career
advising/mentoring, internships);
B. Category 2 – One-time Service Activities
One-time Service Activities are service-related activities that are only a single occurrence and
do not represent a long-term commitment to that particular service activity (e.g., single-day
events or single-occurrence events).
● Participation as a juror and/or panelist at an on-campus event, professional
conference, or community event;
● Discipline-specific presentation or event for the local community, student club, or the
campus (e.g., community or health outreach event);
● Evaluation of faculty (tenure-track and part-time classroom visitation reports);
● Serving as a peer reviewer for journals, presses, conference submissions (i.e.,
proceedings, presentations, workshops), or granting agencies;
● Marshaling for commencement; Retention, Promotion, and Tenure (RPT) Guidelines
● Serving as a search committee member for search committees within the college and
university;
● Serving as a search committee chair within the program, college, and university;
● Acting as a scholarly resource in non-academic contexts (e.g., for the government, the
press, or in publications for a popular audience)
C. Category 3 – Long-Term Service Activities
Long-term Service Activities are service-related activities that a faculty is involved in across all
levels of the university and profession. When the service activity represents the completion of
activities, but without a clear leadership role, the activity would be considered Category 3
(unless it is an essential service).
● Serving on more than one MSPA committee, such as the assessment, curriculum,
admissions committee, etc.;
● Participating (but not chairing/leading) in an active/working college or university
committee or program;

361

● Serving as an active faculty member in another program/department (e.g., attending
another department's meetings, serving on another department's committees, etc.);
● Acting regularly as a resource or consultant for the campus or greater community
regarding academic or professional subject matter through outreach and networking
(e.g., pro-bono consulting, radio interviews);
● Serving as an advisor to a student organization/club on campus (e.g., Pre-PA Student
Society);
● Serving on a master’s degree culminating project committee (when not part of
assigned teaching duties);
● Collaborating with colleagues from across campus, or from other campuses on one or
more service-related activities/projects, including curricular, facilities, policies, or service
grant-writing;
● Involved in a formal mentoring program;
● Internal grant funding received for service-related activities;
● Participating actively in a discipline-based professional association (e.g., by serving as
a
committee member for PA Education Association [PAEA], American Academy of
Physician Associates [AAPA], California Academy of Physician Associates [CAPA], etc.);
● Serving on a board or other community organization related to academic/professional
interest;
● Participating in a collaborative discipline-based partnership with the community,
schools, industry, or other agencies that result in a notable impact on the curriculum,
the CSUSB campus, and/or the community;
● Expanding opportunities for students or programs in the community in an area of
academic and/or professional interest (such as creating an internship or building
long-term relationships that support student professional development) above and
beyond assigned teaching duties;
D. Category 4 – Leadership Activities
Leadership Activities consist of clear leadership activities in service of the department, college,
discipline, and profession. If the FAR description and/or JAR indicates that the faculty member
took a clear leadership role with documentation demonstrating the work, it would indicate
that the activity belongs in Category 4.
● Awarded a Service-related Award (college, university, community, professional);
● Chairing or leading standing college or university committees or Programs;
● Chairing a named MSPA committee (e.g., curriculum, assessment, etc.) and/or major
task force;

362

● Leading a major MSPA program or initiative (e.g., pipeline programs, summer
programs);
● Acting as an elected or appointed leader in healthcare, public health, education,
discipline-based professional associations (e.g., PAEA, AAPA, CAPA), or
professional organizations related to the mission of the MSPA Program;
● Creating and/or successfully sustaining significant collaborative partnerships with
schools, industry, community, or other agencies that results in a notable impact on
curriculum, the CSUSB campus, and/or the community;
● Serving as an editor of an academic or professional journal;
● Developing, running, and/or maintaining community programs that result in students
having a practical application of academic knowledge and providing services to the
community (e.g., free clinics, street medicine) when above and beyond assigned
teaching duties.
E. Tables 3 & 4 – Service Activities Ratings and Activity Requirements
The tables below outline suggested annual service activity, as well as requirements for tenure
and promotion. It is the faculty’s primary responsibility to outline their service activities in all
categories in their FAR document. The Suggested Annual Activity column describes the
minimum suggested annual activity in each category by rating per year. The Total for Tenure
and Promotion section describes the minimum service activities in each category by rating
when applying for tenure and/or promotion. If more than the minimum service activities are
completed in a higher category, they can count toward a lower category (ONE Category 3 =
TWO Category 2; ONE Category 4= TWO Category 3).
A minimum combination of activities required for the achievement of Above Expectations,
Meets Expectations, Below Expectations, and Well Below Expectations in Service Activities for
Retention, Promotion, and Tenure from Assistant to Associate Professor is listed in Table 3.
Table 3. Service Activities Ratings and Activity Requirements (Assistant to Associate Professor)
Rating Suggested Annual Activity Total for Tenure and Promotion
Above Expectations
● Category 1 – minimum of 1 activity
● Category 2 – minimum of 2 distinct* activities
● Category 3 – minimum of 2-3 distinct* activities
● Category 4 – minimum of 1 activity
+
● Category 1 – continuous
● Category 2 – minimum of 10 activities

363

● Category 3 – minimum of 12 activities
● Category 4 – minimum of 2 activities
Meets Expectations ● Category 1 – minimum of 1 activity
● Category 2 – minimum of 2 distinct* activities
● Category 3 – minimum of 1-2 distinct* activities
● Category 1 – continuous
● Category 2 – minimum of 10 activities
● Category 3 – minimum of 8 activities
Below Expectations
● Category 1 – continuous
● Category 2 – less than 10 activities
● Category 3 – less than 8 activities
Well Below Expectations
● Category 1 – continuous
A minimum combination of activities required for the achievement of Above Expectations,
Meets Expectations, Below Expectations, Well Below Expectations in Service Activities for
Tenure and Promotion from Associate Professor to Professor is listed in Table 4.
Table 4. Service Activities Ratings and Activity Requirements (Associate Professor to Professor)
Rating Suggested Annual Activity Total for Tenure and Promotion
Above Expectations
● Category 1 – minimum of 1 activity
● Category 2 – minimum of 2 distinct* activities
● Category 3 – minimum of 3 distinct* activities
● Category 4 – minimum of 1 activity
+
● Category 1 – continuous
● Category 2 – minimum of 10 activities
● Category 3 – minimum of 15 activities
● Category 4 – minimum of 3 activities
Meets Expectations
● Category 1 – minimum of 1 activity

364

● Category 2 – minimum of 2 distinct* activities
● Category 3 – minimum of 2-3 distinct* activities
● Category 4 – minimum of 1 activity
+
● Category 1 – continuous
● Category 2 – minimum of 10 activities
● Category 3 – minimum of 12 activities
● Category 4 – minimum of 2 activities
Below Expectations
● Category 1 – continuous
● Category 2 – less than 10 activities
● Category 3 – less than 12 activities
Well Below Expectations
● Category 1 – continuous
For Tables 3 and 4:
+ Indicates suggested activity may be completed annually or every other year to meet
total requirement.
* “Distinct activity” in this context means separate and distinct service commitments and
should be explicitly clear in the FAR document how they are distinct. For example, each time a
faculty leads a different college or university committee (or serves a separate year as chair)
counts as a distinct activity within Category 4. In addition, if a faculty member was on a
university committee for multiple years, each
year of service would count towards Category 3, for example. If a faculty member was a chair of
a committee for multiple years, each year of service as a chair would count towards category 4
and count for category 3 if evidence of distinct differences in service activities. The faculty
member is awarded a year for each year served, e.g., a three-year commitment is awarded
three years.
APPENDIX A – MSPA PROGRAM WORKLOAD POLICY
Table 1. Percentage Time and Weighted Teaching Units (WTUs) by Position
Position Teaching Scholarship Service Total
Assistant/Associate/Full Professor
(Principal Faculty)

365

67%
(10 WTU)
7-13%
(1-2 WTU)
13-27%
(2-4 WTU)
100%
(15 WTU)
Director of Didactic
Education
^
Director of Clinical
Education
^
47%
(7 WTU)
0-7%*
(0-1 WTU)
46-53%
(7-8 WTU)
100%
(15 WTU)
Program Director
^+ 0-20%*
(0-3 WTU)
0-7%*

366

(0-1 WTU)
80-100%
(12-15 WTU)
100%
(15 WTU)
^ These program members are not Unit 3 faculty, but we list their approximate workload
percentages here for
completeness and comparison.
* Not required based on job responsibilities. Please see the appropriate section below.
+Per ARC-PA accreditation standards, the program director must dedicate at least 80% of their
time to administrative
responsibilities.
Workload for tenure-line Unit 3 faculty is 15 weighted teaching units (WTUs) per term, of which
a maximum of 12 WTUs may be assigned for direct instruction leaving at least 3 WTUs for
Updated: 05.03.2024 Page |
15
CSUSB MSPA Program; 2024
Retention, Promotion, and Tenure (RPT) Guidelines
scholarship and service activities. Lecturers can be assigned up to 15 WTU for direct instruction
per term.
Teaching:
Teaching load for the MSPA Program is based on a workload of 10 weighted teaching units
(WTUs) per semester. A semester workload of 10 WTUs equates to a 67% teaching load.
A faculty member who manages a significant function of the program (e.g., MSPA Admissions)
may be granted up to a 2 WTU teaching load reduction per semester with the written
authorization of the Program Director. For example, a faculty member’s 67% teaching load (10
WTU) could be reduced to 53% (8 WTU). In these instances, and those of other reassigned
time awards, a faculty member’s direct instructional workload can be decreased from 10 WTU
temporarily for a term or until the end of the assigned time contract. Further details can be
found
in the MSPA Program Workload Based on Course and Teaching Function section below.
MSPA Program Workload Based on Course and Teaching Function
The WTUs for each course are calculated based on the California State University (CSU)
Course Classification System, and they are summarized in Table 2: Weighted Teaching Unit
(WTU) Calculations for MSPA Courses Using the CSU Course Classification System. Courses

367

are assigned WTUs based on the type of instruction and the amount of curriculum development
required. For example, a one-credit hour course with interprofessional education (IPE) and
practical exam components will be adjusted as follows:
● (1.0 credit hour course * 1.5) + (0.5 WTU) = 1.5 + 0.5 = 2 WTUs
After WTUs have been calculated for a course using the CSU Course Classification System,
workload can be determined using Table 3: MSPA Workload Based on Teaching Function. For
example, a Co-course Director of a course with 8.0 WTUs would receive 50%, which is 4.0
WTUs.
Table 2. Weighted Teaching Unit (WTU) Calculations for MSPA Courses Using the CSU
Course Classification System
Course Type Definition Workload Adjustment
Course without a
laboratory component
Course does not include a laboratory
component or special instruction.
No additional WTU
Course with a
laboratory component
Course includes a laboratory or practical
component such as physical examinations
or clinical procedures.
K factor of 2.0 per laboratory
credit hour. Based on class
size, a minimum of two
laboratory sections are
required.
Updated: 05.03.2024 Page |
16
CSUSB MSPA Program; 2024
Retention, Promotion, and Tenure (RPT) Guidelines

368

Course with special
instruction
Course includes at least one of the
following types of special instruction:
● Category 1: OSCEs
● Category 2: Practical or skills
exams
● Category 3: Interprofessional
education (IPE)
K factor of 1.5 per credit hour.
In courses with lecture and
laboratory components, a K
factor of 1.5 only applies to the
lecture component, as a K
factor of 2 is already applied to
laboratory components.
Additional 0.5 WTU of assigned
time may be granted based on
complexity of the course,
including if a combination of
more than one category of
special instruction is included in
the course.
Course with applied
learning experiences
Course includes community health and/or
applied learning experiences during the
didactic phase.
K factor of 1.5 per credit hour.
Additional 0.5 WTU may be
granted due to complexity of
arranging and coordinating with

369

sites for community health
and/or applied learning
experiences.
Experiential
education courses
(clinical phase)
Course is one of the Supervised Clinical
Practice Experiences (SCPEs) during the
clinical phase. (Note: Direct clinical
instruction is provided by clinicians [i.e.,
preceptors] and not by MSPA faculty.)
0.75 WTU per credit hour
Course with a
culminating
experience
component
Course includes the comprehensive
examination (also known as the
summative evaluation), which includes a
minimum of three components. The
separate components include a
comprehensive written exam, OSCEs,
and practicals.
1.0 WTU per component
Collaborative
teaching
Collaborative teaching includes (but is not
limited to) laboratory sessions (e.g.,
practical and skill-based instruction),
interprofessional education, practical

370

examinations, and OSCEs. Collaborative
participation is expected of all MSPA
faculty each semester unless granted
written permission from the Program
Director.
Additional 0.5 WTUs per
semester (per instructor)
Course development
or major revision
Course is being developed for the first
time or is undergoing significant revision.
● Up to 3 WTUs per
semester for the first and
second years
● After initial program launch,
WTUs for course
development and major
revision must be approved
Updated: 05.03.2024 Page |
17
CSUSB MSPA Program; 2024
Retention, Promotion, and Tenure (RPT) Guidelines
by the MSPA Program
Director.
Table 3. MSPA Workload Based on Teaching Function
Teaching
Function
Definition Workload
Percentage
Course Director, Sole

371

Instructor
Only MSPA faculty member overseeing the course. Writes/oversees
course structure/modules, arranges and manages course, provides
course advisement, maintains grade book, sole grader, sole instructor
(up to two guest speakers).
100%
Course Director,
Primary Instructor
Only MSPA faculty member overseeing the course. Writes/oversees
course structure/modules, arranges and manages course, provides
course advisement, maintains grade book, sole grader. Course
includes at least one additional MSPA faculty instructor and/or
facilitator, but maintains responsibility for all content, testing, and
grading.
Up to 70%
Course Facilitator Only MSPA faculty member overseeing the course. Writes/oversees
course structure/modules, arranges and manages course, provides
course advisement, maintains grade book, sole grader. Little to no
personal teaching; primarily uses guest speakers.
Up to 50%
Co-Course Director Split equally between two MSPA faculty members who oversee the
course. Both contribute equally to writing/overseeing course
structure/modules, arrange and manage course, provide course
advisement, maintain grade book. Both are primary instructors (up to
two guest speakers).
Up to 50%
Adjunct Faculty Non-MSPA faculty who function as the Course Director, whether as a

372

sole instructor or primary instructor.
100%
Instructional Faculty Non-MSPA faculty who serve as instructors or facilitators in didactic
courses and preceptors in clinical courses.
Percentage is based on the hours dedicated to teaching/facilitation compared to overall course
Research, Scholarship, or Creative Contributions:
There is no scholarship requirement for the Director of Didactic Education, Director of Clinical
Education, and Program Director (as they are not Unit 3 faculty). However, these MSPA
members are able to contribute up to 7% (1 WTU) to scholarly work if desired.
Tenure-track Faculty in the MSPA Program are required to contribute to scholarly work.
Scholarly work can be in the following categories:
● Scholarship of Discovery
● Scholarship of Integration
● Scholarship of Application
● Scholarship of Teaching
Table 4. Types of Scholarship Based on Ernest Boyer’s Scholarship Reconsidered
Updated: 05.03.2024 Page |
18
CSUSB MSPA Program; 2024
Retention, Promotion, and Tenure (RPT) Guidelines
Type of Scholarship Definition Examples
Scholarship of Discovery
● Search for new knowledge
● Discovery of new
information and new
models
● Sharing discoveries through
scholarly publication

373

● Internally or externally funded
research projects
● Research projects
● Peer-reviewed journal articles
● Book chapters and/or books
Scholarship of Integration
● Integration of knowledge from different sources
● Presents overview of findings in a resource topic
● Bringing findings together from different disciplines to discover convergence.
● Identify trends and see knowledge in new ways.
● Professional development workshops and continuing
education
● Literature reviews
● Presentations of research at conferences
● Non-academic publications that address discipline-related Concerns
● Meta-analysis
● Accreditation activities
Scholarship of Application
● Discovering ways for new knowledge to be used to solve real-world problems.
● Consulting activities in field that directly relates to the intellectual work of the faculty
member, and end result is disseminated in an academic fashion.
● Support or development of community activities that link with academic discipline.
● Formal development and/or oversight of practica or partnerships for the program’s students
(beyond established curriculum).
● Editor or member of editorial board for professional journal
● Reviewer of manuscripts for professional journals or books
● Media contributions (newspaper, magazine, etc.)
Scholarship of Teaching

374

● Involves the search for innovative approaches and best practices to develop skills and
disseminate Knowledge.
● Informal or formal teaching, advising, and mentoring
● Educational research projects resulting in findings disseminated at professional conferences
and/or in peer-reviewed publications
● Projects funded by external or internal grants to support instructional activities.
● Publication of textbooks or teaching materials.
Service:
Service load for the MSPA Program is based on position. The service workload for Unit 3 faculty
is 2-4 weighted teaching units (WTUs) per semester. Whereas, the service load for Director
roles may range from 7 to 15 WTUs per semester (due to administrative responsibilities). Every
faculty member is required to perform essential service activities each year for the department,
college, university, and service community. Essential service includes (but is not limited to)
regular participation in department meetings, contributing to activities that uphold the
department function, collaborative teaching, standard committee or task force membership,
attending and contributing to programmatic and CSUSB events (e.g., graduation and white coat
ceremony), supporting student success, faculty peer evaluation/mentoring, and more.
In addition to essential service, MSPA program faculty are expected to perform one-time and
long-term service activities in order to “meet expectations” for retention, tenure, and
promotion.
In order to be “above expectations,” MSPA program faculty must also be engaged in leadership
activities.
APPENDIX B – FACULTY ACTIVITY REPORT (FAR)
Faculty Member _______________________________________________
Department ___________________________________________________
Academic Year ___________________________
As part of the submission, all supporting documentation listed below must be included in an
Index of Attachments.
I. Teaching
a. Category 1 – Essential Teaching Activities
b. Category 2 – Indicators of Teaching Effectiveness
c. Category 3 – Indicators of Teaching Excellence
II. Research, Scholarship, and Creative Activities
a. Category 1 – Essential Research, Scholarship, and/or Creative Activities
Updated: 05.03.2024 Page |

375

20
CSUSB MSPA Program; 2024
Retention, Promotion, and Tenure (RPT) Guidelines
b. Category 2 – Indicators of Sustained Research, Scholarship, and/or Creative
Activities
c. Category 3 – Indicators of Sustained Excellence in Research, Scholarship,
and/or
Creative Activities
III. Service
a. Category 1 – Essential Service Activities
b. Category 2 – One-time Service Activities
c. Category 3 – Long-term Service Activities
d. Category 4 – Leadership Activities
IV. Other Information
a. Faculty may include other information appropriate to the evaluation criteria.
__________________________________________
_____________________
Signature Date
APPENDIX C – JOINT ACTIVITY REPORT (JAR)
Faculty Member _______________________________________________
Department ___________________________________________________
Academic Year ___________________________
To ensure fairness and equity in deliberations by RPT committees, a faculty member should
supply a clarification of their individual contribution to each joint activity listed on their Faculty
Activities Report.
Updated: 05.03.2024 Page |
21
CSUSB MSPA Program; 2024
Retention, Promotion, and Tenure (RPT) Guidelines
For each joint activity, please provide the information listed below. Faculty can attach as many
sheets as needed to the Faculty Activity Report.

376

Note: Faculty are recommended to attach the JAR as the first page in the attachment of
evidence for evaluators to review more easily.
APPENDIX D – REFERENCES
1. Mitchell KMW, Martin J. Gender bias in student evaluations. PS Polit Sci Polit. 2018;
51(3):648-652. doi:10.1017/S104909651800001X
2. Ambady N, Rosenthal. Half a minute: Predicting teacher evaluations from thin slices of
nonverbal behavior and physical attractiveness. J Pers Soc Psychol. 1993; 64(3):431-441.
doi:10.1037/0022-3514.64.3.431
3. Russ T, Simonds C, Hunt S. Coming out in the classroom... an occupational hazard? The
influence of sexual orientation on teacher credibility and perceived student learning. Comm
Ed. 2002; 51(3):311-324. doi:10.1080/03634520216516
Activity Title
as listed in Faculty Activity Report
Activity Description Contribution
Identify the activity by title as listed in your Faculty Activity Report.
Describe your activities in the preparation of this project (e.g., amount of research, degree of
consultation, assembling of an exhibition, etc.).
Describe the amount and significance of your contribution to the joint activity and provide the
percent contribution for yourself and each contributor.
4. Reid LD. The role of perceived race and gender in the evaluation of college teaching on
RateMyProfessors.com. J Divers High Educ. 2010; 3(3):137-152. doi:10.1037/a0019865
5. Boyer EL. Scholarship Reconsidered: Priorities of the Professoriate. John Wiley and Sons;

377

FAM 652.6
ELECTION OF DEPARTMENT EVALUATION COMMITTEES
FAM 652.6 ELECTION OF DEPARTMENT EVALUATION COMMITTEES.pdf

Purpose and Scope
This policy sets forth provisions regarding the election of the Department Evaluation Committee.
The functions and other aspects of the said committee are specified in appropriate places in
FAM 651.1: Evaluation of Tenure-Line Faculty.
Definition
The term department used in this document refers to an academic unit in an academic college
that houses faculty and offers academic programs to students. It includes both departments and
schools (e.g. School of Computer Science and Engineering and School of Social Work).
Consequently, the term department chair is used to refer to both department chair and school
director; the term Department Evaluation Committee refers to both Department Evaluation
Committee and School Evaluation Committee.
Peer review lies at the heart of evaluation in academia. In the CSUSB's RPT process, the
responsibility of peer review rests with the Department Evaluation Committee. As such, the
election of the Department Evaluation Committee should be conducted with utmost integrity. A
Department Evaluation Committee shall normally be composed of three tenured faculty. In
departments with many evaluations to conduct, the department may vote to increase the size of
the DEC to as many as five members. One member may be an Associate Professor who is not
undergoing performance review, and the remaining members must be Professors. Associate
Professors must recuse themselves from cases involving promotion to Professor (see CBA
Article 15.43). If a recusal results in a committee with fewer than three members, the
department shall elect a Professor to serve as an alternate committee member. Eligible faculty
who are undergoing periodic evaluation may serve on the committee but must recuse
themselves from their own evaluation. The Department Chair may not serve on this committee.
The committee shall elect its chair who must hold the rank of Professor. The committee serves
a one-year term, elected annually from within the department or from related academic
disciplines. It is the responsibility of the department chair to initiate and supervise the process
for the election of the Department Evaluation Committee. Questions on procedures and
eligibility shall be addressed to the College Elections Officer, who may consult with the Office of
Faculty Affairs and Development or the Executive Committee of the Faculty Senate as needed.
Election challenges concerning violation of procedure shall be adjudicated by the University
Elections Committee.
Procedures for Election(s)
1. All elections described here shall follow the procedures in the Bylaws of the Faculty Senate,
Article II, Section 3.). College elections officers are available to provide guidance to departments

378

on election procedures.
2. At the start of each academic year, before nominations of DEC members occur, any
departmental
tenure-line faculty member may request in writing that the DEC should consist of up to five
members rather than the default three members. If such a request is made, the tenure-line
faculty in the department shall conduct an anonymous election to determine the number of DEC
members.
3. The department chair shall call for nominations for the positions on the Department
Evaluation
Committee. Only tenure-line faculty within the Department are eligible to make nominations.
There is no limit to the number of nominations a faculty member may make but each nomination
must be verified as coming from a tenure-line faculty member in the department. Nominees
must be tenured Professors or Associate Professors. Faculty in the Faculty Early Retirement
Program are eligible to serve on a Departmental Evaluation Committee if (a) the period of active
employment spans the period of the Committee's work, and (b) the appointment is approved by
the College Dean. However, evaluation committees may not be comprised solely of faculty
participating in the Faculty Early Retirement Program. Although faculty on sabbatical or
difference-in-pay leaves are under no obligation whatsoever to perform departmental/school
service during their leaves, they are eligible to serve on their department's/school's evaluation
committee if they freely choose to do so (without undue pressure or solicitation by their
colleagues) and, in addition, agree to review the files for all review cycles and to attend all
meetings throughout the entire academic year, including cycles and meetings that occur during
the time they are on leave. Nominees must be from within the Department or from a related
academic discipline. Standard nominating forms shall be used. (See Attachment A).
4. Members of a Department Evaluation Committee cannot concurrently serve on the College
Evaluation Committee or the University Evaluation Committee. They may, however, be elected t
other departmental evaluation committees. Department Evaluation Committee members who
are undergoing a Periodic Evaluation may serve on the Department Evaluation Committee but
must recuse themselves when they are being evaluated. Also, department chairs cannot serve
on the evaluation committee within their own Department but may be elected to other
department committees.
5. What constitutes a related discipline is to be determined by the tenure-line faculty of the
Department.
6. If a recusal results in fewer than three committee members, the department shall conduct an
anonymous vote for a Professor to serve as an alternate committee member.
7. If fewer nominations are received than positions available, nominations shall automatically be
extended for a period of three days to allow for additional nominations. All members of the
Department shall be informed in writing of this extension. If there are still fewer nominations

379

than positions, an election shall be held for the nominees available and then the vacancy filled
by starting a new election at Step 3, above.
8. The nominating period shall extend for five working days after the day that the call for
nominations is distributed to faculty. The departmental tenure-line faculty shall be notified via
email or some other secure method of the list of nominees three (3) days before the distribution
of ballots.
9. Only tenure-line faculty within the Department may vote in Department evaluation committee
elections. This includes department chairs and others who are appointed to administrative
positions but remain in the employment status of faculty (Unit-Three).
10. Ballots shall be distributed within three working days after nominations close, using the
normal Senate procedures (See Bylaws of the Faculty Senate, Article II, Section 3) for
confidential voting. Ballots must be received by the Department office no later than four working
days after they are distributed to faculty.
11. Ballots shall be prepared and tallied as follows:
a. The name of every eligible nominee shall be placed on the ballot.
b. If there are more qualified candidates than positions, a ratification/election ballot shall
be used (Attachment B). Otherwise, only a ratification ballot will be needed (Attachment
C), except for the following special case. If there are more candidates than positions, if
no associate professor is currently on the committee and if the number of professor
candidates is less than the number of positions, then a ratification ballot shall be used for
the professor candidates and a ratification/election ballot used for the associate
professor candidates.
c. Ballots shall be opened and counted by the department chair and the college elections
officer (or designee for the latter).
d. Whenever there is one candidate per position, a candidate is ratified upon receiving a
majority of the "acceptable" votes among the valid ballots cast. At this point the election
is over. If any positions remain unfilled (due to candidates not being ratified), then a new
election will be called to fill those remaining vacant positions.
e. For ratification/election ballots, evaluate ratification first. A candidate is ratified upon
receiving a majority of the "acceptable" votes among the valid ballots cast. Candidates
not ratified are disqualified from the preferential count. Preferential votes are tallied
according to the ballot procedure as described in the Bylaws of the Faculty Senate,
Article II, Section 3.G). Once one associate professor has been elected, all additional
associate professors shall be deemed ineligible for the remaining positions. If the
election results in a committee composed entirely of faculty in the Faculty Early

380

Retirement Program, the last FER Per elected shall be removed and one more
committee member shall be elected from among the remaining candidates who are not
participating in the Faculty Early Retirement Program.
12. If, for any reason, a Department Evaluation Committee does not have at least three
members who
meet the criteria, the department chair should work to nominate other qualified nominees from
related departments. If a Department Evaluation Committee does not have at least three
members, and an evaluation deadline is imminent, it shall complete the evaluation with its two
available members. A special election shall be held at the earliest opportunity to fill in the
missing position(s).
13. All members of the Department are to be notified in writing or electronically of the outcome
of each election. The department chair shall send the results of the election to the College
Office, the Faculty Senate Office and the Office of Faculty Affairs and Development.
14. All election materials shall be retained by the department for 30 calendar days after ballots
have been counted. These materials shall be available for inspection. To be valid, election
challenges must be filed in writing with the University Elections Committee within five working
days from the date that the election results are distributed to faculty.

Attachment A
DEPARTMENT EVALUATION COMMITTEE NOMINATION
FORM DEPARTMENT OF _____ _
[Note: Only tenure-line faculty at the rank of Professor or Associate Professor (not under
consideration
for promotion during the academic year) are eligible to be nominated. No department chair may
be
nominated for the department evaluation committee within their department. No member of the
University Evaluation Committee is eligible to serve on a department evaluation committee. No
member of a college evaluation committee is eligible to serve on a department evaluation
committee
within their college. Faculty in the Faculty Early Retirement Program are eligible to serve on a
Departmental Evaluation Committee if (a) the period of active employment is two semesters of
the
academic year and (b) the appointment is approved by the College Dean.]
Printed name of person being nominated
Signature of person being nominated Date

381

(This signature indicates a willingness to accept the nomination.)
Printed name of person making the nomination
Signature of person making the nomination Date
[Note: Only tenure-line faculty within the department may nominate. Self-nomination is
permitted. There
is no limit to the number of nominations an eligible faculty can make.]

Attachment B
DEPARTMENT EVALUATION COMMITTEE ELECTION BALLOT
DEPARTMENT OF _____________ _
The persons below were nominated to serve on the Department Evaluation Committee. There
are _openings on this committee. This is a two-part ballot, both parts need to be completed.
1. In the ACCEPTABILITY columns, please mark either "acceptable" or "unacceptable." Failure
to vote on acceptability will have the same effect as voting "unacceptable."
2. In the RANK column, please rank order all candidates (including those marked unacceptable)
by marking "1" by the name of your 1st choice (most preferred) candidate, "2" by the name of
your 2nd choice candidate, "3" by the name of your 3rd choice candidate, and so on. Make sure
all candidates are ranked. Incomplete ranking will render your ballot invalid.
[Note: Only tenure-line faculty are eligible to vote.]
ACCEPTABILITY RANK
Acceptable Unacceptable Vote Candidate

Attachment C
DEPARTMENT EVALUATION COMMITTEE RATIFICATION BALLOT
DEPARTMENT OF -------------The persons below were nominated to serve on the Department Evaluation Committee. They
are unopposed for the position(s}. Please vote on ratification for each of these candidates by
marking in either the "acceptable" or "unacceptable" space next to each candidate. Failure to
vote for a candidate will have the same effect as voting "unacceptable."

382

[Note: Only tenure-line faculty are eligible to vote.]
ACCEPTABILITY
Acceptable Unacceptable Candidate
8
Approvals
Approved by the Faculty Senate on October 24, 2023
Approved by the President on
History
First created: 2007 by Faculty Affairs Committee
Renumbered:· from FAM 315 to FAM 651.7
Renumbered: 2020 from FAM 651.7 to 652.6
Minorly edited: 2020 by Faculty Affairs Committee
Revised: 2023 by Faculty Affairs Committee

FAM 653.3
POLICY CONCERNING IMPLEMENTATION OF THE FACULTY MERIT INCREASE AND
SERVICE SALARY STEP INCREASE PROGRAMS
FAM 653.3 IMPLEMENTATION OF FACULTY MERIT INCREASE AND SERVICE SALARY
STEP INCREASE

1. Preamble
This document is designed to implement the sections in Article 31 in the Memorandum of
Understanding for employees in the Faculty Bargaining Unit (Unit 3) dealing with the Faculty
Merit Increase and Service Salary Step Increase Programs. All Faculty Merit Increase (FMI) and
Service Salary Step Increase (SSSI) awards at California State University, San Bernardino shall be
made in conformance with this policy. In any instance of conflict between the Memorandum of
Understanding (MOU) and this FMI policy, the MOU shall govern.
All faculty, both tenure-track and temporary, have the right to be involved in the departmental
determination of the appropriate FMI structure, all faculty have the right to participate in
voting for and serving on department committees should that be the mechanism chosen, and
all faculty have the right to participate in voting for and serving on the campus appeals panel.
All appeals panel and committee members shall have equal voting rights as committee or panel

383

members regardless of time base. Each department shall be responsible for ensuring that
adequate records concerning temporary faculty are maintained.
2. Definitions
2.1 The term "department/school" shall be used to refer to an academic department or
equivalent unit for the purpose of this FMI policy. The three equivalent units shall be (a)
coaches, (b) counselors, and © librarians. Each department or equivalent unit may have
a "Department/school" FMI Committee. Individual instructional faculty unit employees
in Undergraduate Studies shall be grouped with the academic department(s)/school(s)
most closely related to the discipline(s) they teach for the portion of their time base
relevant to each department/school. Temporary faculty in a college teaching
interdisciplinary courses and not assigned to a department/school shall make a
permanent decision concerning with which department/school in the college they
choose to be grouped for the purpose of this FMI policy. Tenure-track faculty with joint
appointments shall be assigned to their primary department/school for the purpose of
FMI review. Temporary faculty teaching in more than one department/school shall
be reviewed in each department/school for the portion of their time base relevant to
that department/school.
2.2 The term "department chair/school director" shall be used to refer to an academic
department chair/school director or equivalent for the purpose of this FMI policy. The
department chair/school director equivalent for coaches shall be the Athletics
Compliance Officer. The department chair/school director equivalent for Librarians shall
be the Faculty Senate Librarian representative. The department chair/school director
equivalent for Counselors shall be their immediate supervisors. These definitions of
department chair/school director equivalents do not imply an expectation that
Management Personnel Plan faculty will serve on department/school FMI or SSSI
committees.
2.3 The term "college" shall be used to refer to an academic college or equivalent unit
for the purpose of this FMI policy. The three units equivalent to colleges shall be (a)
Athletics, (b) Student Affairs, and (c) Library.
2.4 The term "dean" shall be used to refer to an academic dean or equivalent for the
purpose of this FMI policy. For coaches, the Director of Athletics shall be the college
dean equivalent. For librarians, theUniversity Librarian shall be the dean equivalent. For
counselors, the Vice President for Student Affairs shall be the dean equivalent.

384

3. Annual Activities Report (AAR)
Each faculty unit employee shall submit three copies of a completed Annual Activities Report
(AAR) to her/his department chair/school director.
3.1 For 1998/99 and 1999/00, the AAR shall be submitted no later than October 1, 1999.
This report shall detail annual faculty activities in
separate sections as follows.
a) For 1998/99, all appropriate activities from July 1, 1995 or from the period
covered in the last successful PSSI review or from the date of initial appointment
(whichever beginning date is most recent) through June 30, 1998; FMIs to be
effective July 1, 1998.
b) For 1999/00, all appropriate activities from July 1, 1998 through
June 30, 1999; FMIs to be effective July 1, 1999.
3.2 The AAR shall be submitted no later than October 1 of each year
thereafter. In fiscal year 2000/01, the time period of review for
activities contained in the AAR shall be July 1, 1999 through June 30,
2000. Additional time lines for the FMI program for each year shall be
as provided in Appendix G of the MOU.
3.3 The AAR format shall be as shown in Attachment 1 (not available).
Each AAR shall include the faculty unit employee's rank/classification,
salary, date of appointment, and whether the faculty unit employee is
eligible for a Service Salary Step Increase.
3.4 The AAR must cover only the designated time period. If an activity is
spread out over more than this period, the AAR must describe the
contribution to this activity which was made during that time period.
4. FMI Eligibility
All full- and part-time faculty unit employees who submit completed AARs are eligible for
and shall be considered for FMIs except those indicated in Sections 4.1 and 4.2 below.
4.1 The following employees are not eligible for FMIs: Substitute
Instructional Faculty, Instructional Faculty - Extension, Instructional
Faculty - Special Programs, Instructional Faculty - Summer Arts,

385

Instructional Faculty - Summer Session, persons not employed during
the applicable review period as specified in Section 3, and persons on
full-time leave without pay for personal reasons during the entire
applicable review period.
4.2 Faculty unit employees who indicate on their AARs that they decline to
participate in the FMI program shall not be considered for FMIs.
4.3 The following is a clarification of FMI eligibility for part-time temporary
employees:
a) For 1998/99, part-time temporary faculty unit employees who
submit completed AARs, who had an appointment at any point
during the period July 1, 1995 through June 30, 1998, and who are
eligible to receive the FMI award shall be eligible for consideration
for an FMI.
b) For 1999/00 and thereafter, part-time temporary faculty unit
employees who submit completed AARs, who had an appointment
at any point during the period of the review cycle, and who are
eligible to receive the FMI award shall be eligible for consideration
for an FMI.
c) A part-time temporary faculty unit employee shall have an appointment at
some point during the current academic year for which the FMI awards are
effective in order to be eligible to receive an FMI. The department shall be
responsible for making its best determination as to whether or not a part-time
temporary faculty unit employee has reason to expect an appointment for the
Winter and/or Spring quarters of that current academic year when implementing
Sections 4.3.a and 4.3.b.
5. Criteria
5.1 Faculty unit employees shall be eligible for FMIs for demonstrated
performance commensurate with rank, work assignment, and years of
service for:
a) the quality of the unit member's teaching alone;
b) teaching and scholarship;
c) teaching and service to the University and community; or
d) teaching, scholarship, and service to the University and community.
Tenure track faculty will be evaluated under category 5.1.d unless their work
assignment

386

specifies otherwise.
5.2 Faculty unit employees whose performance does not include assignments in one or
more of the above areas shall nonetheless be eligible for an FMI on the basis of their
performance in the individual areas of their assignment. Examples would be part-time
faculty assigned only to teaching or full-time faculty on sabbatical leave for a year.
5.3 Teaching is broad and inclusive. Teaching encompasses instruction and such
activities as advising, mentoring, supervision (e.g., individual studies, thesis direction,
field supervision), and a range of contributions to improving student learning (e.g.,
curriculum revision, course and program coordination, assessment of learning
outcomes, and applications of technology). For faculty unit employees who are coaches,
counselors, or librarians, "professional assignments" shall substitute for the "teaching"
category.
5.4 Scholarship includes discovery (traditionally labeled research, especially published or
presented to professional audiences), integration (e.g., inter- or cross-disciplinary
efforts), application (e.g., used in teaching or solving social, community, or technical
problems), and creative activity (e.g., works of art, performances).
5.5 Service to the University and community is likewise broad. Service to the University
and community includes the activity necessary to the faculty role in shared governance
of the institution (CSU and its campuses) and activity applying the unit employee's
expertise to benefit the University and its community in general. Examples of service
include significant committee work; student outreach and retention; participation in
university and community organizations, community partnerships, professional
associations, faculty associations, and appropriate governmental boards and
commissions; advancement of public support for the University; and lectures and
seminars to community groups.
For instructional faculty, service shall be defined as university service and/or community
service, and/or administrative assignment. Administrative assignment shall be defined
as duties performed as department chair/school director, as program coordinator, or for
any other administrative duties for which assigned time has been provided at the
systemwide, university or college level.
6. Maximum Amounts and Types of Faculty Merit Increases
No faculty unit employee shall receive more than a 7.5% FMI in any year.

387

6.1 Permanent increase in base salary. An FMI shall be a permanent increase in the base
salary of the faculty unit employee on the salary schedule in Appendix C to the MOU,
except for faculty unit employees (other than Professors) who have reached the top of
their rank or classification in the salary schedule in Appendix C.
6.2 Bonus (not a permanent increase in the base salary of the individual). An FMI shall
be a bonus of no more than the equivalent of an annual salary increase of 7.5% in the
case of any faculty unit employee (except for those at the rank of Professor) who has
reached the top of her/his rank or classification in the salary schedule in Appendix C to
the MOU. An FMI may also be a bonus of no more than an annual salary increase of
7.5% in the case of any faculty unit member whose demonstrated performance is being
recognized as part of an activity or project conducted by a team, department/school, or
group of employees.
7. Levels of Review and the General Review Process
7.1 There shall be three levels of review as follows:
a) The Department/School,
b) The College Dean, and
c) The President and/or designee.
7.2 A faculty unit member shall not review his/her own AAR for an FMI. However, no
faculty unit employee shall become ineligible for service on a Department/School FMI
Committee because he/she is being considered for an FMI.
7.3 Each level of review shall forward all AARs, as well as the recommendations from
that level on each of the faculty unit members, to the next level of review. Failure to
meet any established deadline for recommendations shall automatically result in the
forwarding of all AARs and lower level recommendations to the next level of review.
The timetable for FMI review process is shown in Attachment 2 (not available).
7.4 Recommendations for each faculty unit employee at the first two levels of review in
the FMI process shall include the following:
a) whether the faculty unit employee is recommended to
receive an FMI, and
b) if the recommendation in 7.4.a is yes, the amount of the

388

increase recommended.
8. Allocation of Funds for FMI Recommendations
The total funds available for FMIs in a specific cycle shall be subdivided as follows for the
purpose of recommendations at the review levels specified in Section 7.1.
8.1 An amount equal to 85% of the FMI pool will be assigned to departments as the
amount they can employ in their recommendations. These funds shall be distributed to
departments/schools on a filled FTEF prorata basis. This amount in each department
shall be termed the Department/School FMI pool.
8.2 An amount equal to 10% of the FMI pool will be allocated to the president and/or
designee. The expenditure of these funds shall be reported as a distinct category of the
campus report required in the MOU. This amount shall be termed the President's FMI
pool.
8.3 The campus shall reserve an amount equal to 5% of the FMI pool (the FMI appeal
pool) to fund successful appeals.
8.4 FMI funds not used in a particular cycle shall be rolled forward in the aggregate and
become part of the total funds available for FMIs in the next annual FMI cycle. They are
not rolled forward in the specific categories 8.1, 8.2, or 8.3.
9. Department/School FMI Recommendation Structure
For the purpose of arriving at Departmental/School FMI recommendations,
departments/schools are free to use a Department/School FMI Committee, the department
chair/school director, a designee, or any combination of the preceding. The decision on
structure is to be made on an annual basis by a vote of all faculty unit employees in the
department/school. It is permissible to allow for procedures that permit votes proportional to
time base for part-time unit members. The department chair/school director shall be
responsible for conducting the vote and for notifying the dean concerning the department
decision regarding the structure by which department/school FMI decisions will be made.
Attachment 3 (http://academic- affairs.csusb.edu//personnel/fmi3.htm) contains four specific
alternatives for making department/school FMI recommendations suggested (but not required)
by the Faculty Senate. Department/School procedures must ensure that no faculty unit
member shall participate in the evaluation of her/his own AAR.

389

10. FMI Merit Rating and Recommendations at the Department/School Level
Departments/Schools shall review the AARs of all qualified faculty unit employees
assigned to the department/school, including department chairs/school directors.
Department/School reviewers may ask faculty members to clarify the information in the
AAR. For each award period, the Department/School shall rate the merit of each faculty
unit member using the following scale:
0 = Not Recommended
1 = Recommended
2 = Highly Recommended
3 = Very Highly Recommended
4 = Outstanding
Departments/schools are free to determine how to relate the amount of an FMI
recommendation to the rating scale above. Two possible approaches are shown in Attachment
4 (http://academic-affairs.csusb.edu/personnel/fmi4.htm). Departments/Schools may
recommend that an individual faculty unit member receive an FMI at any amount up to the
maximum amount provided in Section 6. The Department's/School’s recommendations shall
include whether the faculty unit employee should receive an FMI and also the amount of the
FMI. The total dollars of the department's/school’s recommendations for all FMIs
recommended for faculty unit employees in the department/school shall not exceed the
amount of dollars allocated to the Department/School in Section 8.1.
Department/School FMI recommendations and comments shall be made on the FMI
Recommendation Form (Attachment 5, not available) for each faculty unit member and
forwarded along with all AARs to the College Dean. For each faculty unit employee, the
department can forward only one FMI Recommendation Form to the dean and that form can
contain only one set of recommendations regarding FMI ranking, whether to recommend an
FMI and how much.
11. College Dean Review and Recommendation
11.1 All Department/School FMI recommendations shall be reviewed by the College
Dean. The Dean may concur or disagree with the recommendations, may change the
amount of any recommended FMI, and/or may recommend an FMI for any member of
the department/school that was not recommended by the department/school. The

390

dean may recommend that an individual receive an FMI of any amount up to the
maximum amount provided in Section 6. It is the Dean's responsibility to make final
recommendations for disposition of all the FMI funds allocated to departments/schools
within the College. Each recommendation shall be made on the FMI Recommendation
Form.
11.2 The Dean shall forward the AAR and all recommendations from the first two levels
of review to the President and/or designee.
12. President and/or designee Review and Decision
The President and/or designee shall review each AAR and all relevant
recommendations from the first two levels of review. The President and/or designee
may concur or disagree with the recommendations, may change the amount of any
recommended FMI, and/or may grant an FMI for any member of the department that
was not recommended by the department or by the dean. The president may grant that
an individual receive an FMI of any amount up to the maximum amount provided in
Section 6. Each decision shall be made on the FMI Recommendation Form. The total of
the recommendations at this level shall not exceed 95% of the annual FMI funds
available, i.e., the total of the department FMI pools plus the President's FMI pool.
13. Communication, Rebuttals, and Appeal During the AAR Review Process
13.1 As soon as Department/School FMI recommendations are forwarded to the Dean,
the Dean shall provide each faculty unit member with a copy of her/his
Department/School FMI recommendation. If a faculty unit member disagrees with the
recommendation, she/he may file a written rebuttal with the Dean within seven
calendar days of being sent the recommendation.
13.2 The Dean's recommendation on each faculty unit member shall be forwarded
simultaneously to the faculty unit member and the Office of Academic Personnel. If the
faculty unit member disagrees with the recommendation, she/he may submit a written
rebuttal to the Office of Academic Personnel within seven calendar days of being sent
the recommendation.
13.3 The President and/or designee's decision on each faculty unit member shall be
forwarded to the faculty unit member and the Dean. If the President and/or designee
reduces the FMI recommended by the Dean or the Department/School, the affected
faculty unit membermay submit a written rebuttal to and appeal the decision of the

391

President and/or designee. The rebuttal and appeal request shall be submitted in
writing to the Office of Academic Personnel within 14 calendar days of being sent the
decision.
13.4 The appeal shall be heard by an appeal committee as described in the MOU. The
decision of the appeal committee shall be final and binding. This decision shall be
forwarded simultaneously to the faculty unit member, the President and/or designee,
and the Dean. The appeal panel from which the appeal committee is selected shall be
elected at the beginning of Fall quarter by the Faculty Senate Constituent Unit elections
officers. Five members shall be elected from each Constituent Unit. For this purpose,
the five constituent units are defined as follows: Arts & Letters and Library; Business and
Public Administration; Education; Natural Sciences and Coaches; Social and Behavioral
Sciences and Counselors. All faculty unit employees, tenure track and temporary, shall
be eligible to run and vote. Voting shall be done by the preferential method. When the
appeal committee is selected by lot from the panel, one faculty unit employee shall be
selected from each constituent unit.
14. Use of FMI Materials in RPT Deliberations
14.1 The decision concerning granting an FMI shall not be considered in deliberations
regarding reappointment, promotion, or tenure (RPT) unless the faculty unit member
includes the material in her/his Personnel Action File (PAF). This shall not preclude the
consideration of any facts during RTP deliberations which are also considered during
FMI deliberations. AARs and notification of all FMI decisions may be placed in both the
PAF and any Working PAF established for the purpose of RPT evaluations at the
discretion of the faculty unit employee.
14.2 The award of FMIs shall not be considered personnel recommendations, decisions
or actions which must be based upon a faculty unit member's Personnel Action File.
However, this shall not preclude review of a faculty unit member's WPAF during FMI
deliberations.
15. Campus Information Regarding Those Receiving FMIs
A list of faculty unit employees who have received an FMI, their ranks, the amount of each FMI,
and their department affiliations shall be made public on campus within one month after final
decisions regarding FMIs are made. Awards shall also be reported by amount of increase,
gender, and ethnicity but without individual name. Completed AARs shall be made available in

392

the College Office for a period of one year following publication of the awards, for review by
faculty members in that college.
16. Service Salary Step Increase Procedures (Fiscal Year 1999-2000 and Subsequent Years)
16.1 Faculty bargaining unit employees eligible for an SSSI shall be reviewed by the
Department/School using the same committee/department chair/designee structure
the department has elected to use for the evaluation of department/school members
for FMIs (Section 9). The Department/School shall recommend whether to grant or deny
an SSSI; department/school procedures must ensure that no faculty unit member shall
participate in making the decision regarding her/his own SSSI award. The
department/school recommendation, using an SSSI Recommendation Form, shall be
forwarded to the College Dean. Department/School SSSI recommendations shall be
made and forwarded to the Dean before the department/school FMI recommendations
are made and forwarded.
16.2 The recommendation of the Department/School shall be reviewed by the College
Dean, who shall either grant or deny the SSSI. An SSSI Recommendation Form
(Attachment 6, not available) shall be used. 16.3 The criteria to be used when evaluating
faculty bargaining unit employees for an SSSI shall be whether the employee has
demonstrated satisfactory performance commensurate with rank, work assignment,
and years of service. This evaluation shall be based on the employee's AAR covering the
prior year and may include the employee's Working Personnel Action File.
16.4 The decision to deny an SSSI may be appealed as provided in the MOU, using the
FMI Appeals Panel. The procedure for selecting an SSSI Appeals Committee shall be the
same as for selecting an FMI Appeals Committee. A person who has been selected to
serve on the FMI Appeals Committee may decline to serve on that committee, if she/he
has previously been selected for the SSSI Appeals Committee, or vice versa.

FAM 653.43
PROCEDURES AND CRITERIA FOR RANGE ELEVATION
FAM 653.43 Procedures and Criteria for Range Elevation

Purpose and Scope

393

Lecturers who have no more 551 eligibility in their current range and who have served five
years in this range may apply for elevation to the next higher range. This document sets out the
procedures and criteria to be followed in making and considering such requests for "range
elevation."
Range elevation refers to a salary increase. Lecturers are normally evaluated solely on the basis
of their teaching (FAM 652.2). Excellence in teaching (demonstrated and evaluated in accord
with the Procedures and Criteria for Performance Review and Periodic Evaluation) is, thus, the
primary criterion for range elevation. At the same time, if some element of service or research,
scholarly, or creative contributions is explicitly included in the work assignment of such a
faculty member, this activity should also be evaluated. Additional service and professional
activities, even when these are not directly related to the work assignment, may be taken into
Range Elevation account by those considering a range elevation request. However, no faculty
member should be expected to perform duties not explicitly called for in that faculty member's
work assignment.
There are four ranges: Lecturer A, Lecturer B, Lecturer C, and Lecturer D. As faculty members
move up
from range to range, they will be held to progressively more stringent applications of the
relevant evaluative criteria.
Definitions
1. Department: an academic department or school of the lecturer who applies for range
elevation.
2. Department chair: the chair of a department or director of school.
Participants in Range Elevation
1. All eligible lecturers, regardless of time base.
2. Department chairs or equivalent.
3. Department Evaluation Committee or equivalent.
4. College Deans or equivalent.
Procedures
1. All eligible full-time lecturers who wish to be considered for a range elevation will
submit a Range Elevation Report (RER) to the Office of Faculty Affairs and Development,
which will be responsible for assembling the Working Personnel Action File (WPAF).
2. All eligible part-time lecturers who wish to be considered for a range elevation will

394

submit an RER to their College Office or equivalent, which will be responsible for
assembling the WPAF.
3. The Department Evaluation Committee and Department Chair (or equivalents) shall
review the WPAF and submit a joint evaluation and recommendation to the College
Dean or equivalent. The lecturer shall have ten calendar days to respond in writingto
this joint recommendation.
4. The College Dean (or equivalent) shall review the WPAF, recommendation, and
response (if any), and decide to approve or disapprove the range elevation request. In
the case of a denial, the Dean (or equivalent) shall provide a written justification. The
decision shall be communicated to the faculty member, who shall verify receipt of the
decision.
5. A denial of a range elevation request is subject to the Peer Review process of the
Collective Bargaining Agreement, to be initiated by the faculty member applying for
range elevation by a written request to the Associate Provost for Faculty Affairs and
Development within ten (10) academic days after receipt of the denial The decision of
the Peer Review Panel shall be final.

Instruments of Evaluation
1. Range Elevation Report.
2. The WPAF, which shall include copies of visitation reports, previous evaluations,
appropriate classroom materials such as syllabi and examinations (as set forth in
Procedures and Criteria, chapter 2, II A), and student evaluations.
Criteria for Range Elevation
1. Applicants shall be evaluated according to their effectiveness in performing workload
assignments.
Teaching shall be evaluated by the criteria listed in FAM 652.1: Evaluation of Tenure- Line
Faculty. Applicants may introduce additional evidence that they have maintained currency and
active involvement in their disciplinary field. Examples might include evidence of continuing
education, maintenance of professional licenses, involvement in scholarly research or creative
activity, and involvement in community or University service related to the faculty member's
discipline.
2. It is not expected that lecturers engage in traditional areas of scholarship and
university or community service unless such engagement forms part of their work
assignment. If the work assignment includes such requirements, evaluators shall apply

395

the established criteria for those areas from the Procedures and Criteria document in a
manner which reflects the scope of the assignment and the appropriate proportion
among the areas being evaluated.
Application of Criteria
To be recommended for Range Elevation, the lecturer must be rated as performing at an
Exceeds Expectations level subject to the guidelines listed below. The higher the range, the
higher the expectations. Section 1 applies to the rating of teaching and section 2 applies to the
rating of non-teaching activities, if applicable. As indicated in section c, only those non-teaching
activities (if any) that are part of the lecturers' work assignment must be considered.
1. Exceeds Expectations in teaching should be based on the following guidelines.
a. For range elevation from Lecturer A to Lecturer B, the faculty member must
demonstrate proficiency in each of the four teaching criteria outlined in the
Procedures and Criteria document, and show evidence of additional
commitment to maintaining currency in his or her discipline.
b. For range elevation from Lecturer B to Lecturer C, the faculty member must, in
addition to the above, demonstrate a level of excellence that goes beyond
routine classroom proficiency: examples include but are not limited to: range of
courses taught, pedagogical innovations, development of new courses,
supervision of independent work, evidence of student achievement.
c. For range elevation from Lecturer C to Lecturer D, the faculty member, in
addition to satisfying the guidelines above, the faculty member must have
demonstrated superior subject matter mastery. This mastery may be
demonstrated through professional activities that provide evidence of expertise
and currency in the discipline. Evidence that the lecturer holds a terminal degree
may also be used to satisfy this guideline.
2. Non-teaching duties can cover a tremendously diverse array of activities, thus, an
Exceeds Expectations rating at Range B (for example) should reflect a greater degree of
responsibility and effectiveness than a Exceeds Expectations rating at Range A.
Timeline
The notification of eligibility will occur during the second week of October; the Range Elevation
Report will be due first week of the Spring Semester and the college dean's decision will be due
mid-March. The exact dates will be set at the start of the academic year by the Office of Faculty

396

Affairs and Development.
Range Elevation Report
Name: ____ _
Period Covered From: -----To: -----Department: ___ _ College:
Degrees, Licenses, and/or Certifications: ________ _
This report should identify and cover your work assignment since your last range elevation or
last six years, whichever is more recent. Please attach supporting documentation where
appropriate.
1. Teaching and Instructionally Related Assignments
a. List courses taught. {Indicate course number and title for courses taught and
submit a copy of syllabus for each course.
b. Submit other information that will be of assistance in the evaluation of your
teaching, including, for example, participation in conferences and seminars on
instruction, special preparation for courses and other activities, direction of MA
theses, independent studies, internships, special examinations, development of
new
courses and programs and/or innovative approaches to standard courses.
2. Professional Activities
a. List professional activities that give evidence of maintaining currency in discipline as
well as any special competencies that support your work assignment; for example,
participation in conferences and seminars.
b. List other professional activities.
3. Service to the University and/or Community
a. List service activities that give evidence of maintaining currency in discipline or that
are part of your work assignment.
b. List other service activities

FOR OFFICE USE ONLy
Approved by the CSUSB Faculty Senate on October 27, 2020

397

Signed and dated by
Nov 20, 2020
Beth A. Steffel (Senate Chair) Date
Tomas Morales (President) Date
FAM 653.43; 2018
Range Elevation
[This is the last page of a FAM document and shall be kept in the senate office. The dates on
this page must match dates on the corresponding lines of the previous page.]

FAM 665.7 SCHEDULING OF INSTRUCTIONAL FACULTY
FAM 665.7 Scheduling of Instructional Faculty

Purpose and Scope
The purpose of this policy is to provide limits on the number of consecutive classes that may be
assigned to instructional faculty, and to provide adequate breaks between days of instruction.
The policy is consistent with the Collective Bargaining Agreement (CBA) as of January 2020.
Policy Statement
Faculty shall not be assigned to teach more than four and a half consecutive scheduled class
hours without at least a one-hour break, and shall not be assigned more than six scheduled
hours of instruction on a single day. By request of the faculty member, an exception can be
made for faculty who teach classes that meet one evening a week or for other special situations
(e.g. rehearsal and studio time). Additionally, medical constraints may require specific
scheduling accommodations, and these shall be honored (with documentation as needed).
Faculty shall also have at least a twelve-hour break between the end of one day's instruction
and the beginning of the next day's instruction or other scheduled instructionally-related
meetings (such as department meetings)
Faculty may request an exception to this FAM in writing, subject to the approval of their

398

department chair or school director, and their dean. Instruction involving laboratories, studio,
rehearsals, field work, and supervised instruction is exempt from this requirement.
Approvals
Approved by the Faculty Senate on February 4, 2020
Approved by the President on
History
First created: ____ [Date] by _______ _
Renumbered: ____ [Date] from 435 to 665.7
Revised: 2012 by EPRC
Revised: January 2020 by EPRC
FOR OFFICE USE ONLY
Approved by the CSUSB Faculty Senate on February 4, 2020
Signed and dated by
April 15, 2020
Beth A. Steffel (Senate Chair) Date
Tomas Morales (President) Date
[This is the last page of a FAM document and shall be kept in the senate office. The dates on
this page must match dates on the corresponding lines of the previous page.]

FAM 665.7
SCHEDULING OF INSTRUCTIONAL FACULTY FAM
GUIDELINES FOR SCHEDULING OF INSTRUCTIONAL FACULTY
Faculty shall not be assigned to teach more than four consecutive scheduled class hours
without at least a one-hour break, and shall not be assigned more than six scheduled hours of
instruction on a single day. They shall also have at least a twelve- hour break before teaching
the next day. Faculty may request an exception in writing, subject to the approval of their

399

department chair or school director, and their dean. Instruction involving laboratories, studio,
rehearsals, field work, and supervised instruction is exempt from this requirement.

FAM 665.73 SCHEDULING OF COUNSELOR FACULTY
FAM 665.73 Scheduling of Counselor Faculty

Purpose and Scope
This policy establishes guidelines for the scheduling of counselor faculty that are consistent
with the Collective Bargaining Agreement (CBA) and professional norms among counselor
faculty. If there is any disagreement between this policy and the CBA,
the CBA shall prevail.
Policy Statement
Counselor faculty shall not be assigned/scheduled (intake/walk-in crisis placeholders and/or
appointments made by office staff or management) more than 24 hours of direct service
responsibilities (60-65%) in a 40-hour work week. On average this should be calculated to be no
more than 6 hours of direct services per day for a 10-hour day and no more than 5 hours for an
8-hour day (noting that counselors may need to partition hours in accordance with their own
specific scheduling needs, i.e., certain days may require increased hours of indirect services
such as documentation or meetings, while other days counselors may choose to engage in
more direct services).
In addition, counselor faculty shall not be assigned to conduct more than four consecutive
hours of direct service without at least a 30- minute break. Direct service hours include the
following: assigned intake placeholders, scheduled therapy hours, scheduled crisis coverage,
outreach activities, liaison activities, workshops/presentations, and individual and group
supervision. Also, given the natural ebb and flow of the counselor's workflow (e.g., more
students access services in the academic year as opposed to the winter intersession) and given
that indirect services such as committee meetings, professional development, trainings, and
research also contribute meaningfully to the operation of the center, certain exceptions to the
above standard can be made with approval of the appropriate administrator.
Accreditation Standards for University and College Counseling Centers
(ASUCCC) issued by the accrediting agency International Association of Counseling Services
(IACS), explicitly provide that "[s]taff members should have a balanced workload that affords
400

time for all aspects of their professional functioning." See ASUCCC V.D. Moreover, "[d]irect
Service responsibilities, i.e. face-to-face contact with clients including intake, individual / group
counseling, and crisis intervention should not exceed 65% of the workload on a continuing
basis." ASUCCC V.D.1.
Approvals
Approved by the Faculty Senate on April 26, 2022
Approved by the President on May 26, 2022
History
Updated: 2022 by FAC
May 26, 2022
Approved by the CSUSB Faculty Senate on
April 26, 2022
Signed and dated by

FAM 668.4 POLICY CONCERNING FACULTY
DEPARTMENTAL/SCHOOL TRANSFER
FAM 668.4 Policy Concerning Faculty Departmental/School Transfer

1. Purpose
The purpose of this policy is to enable, whenever appropriate, the transfer of a
faculty member from one department/school to another.
2. Request for Transfer
The request to transfer a faculty member from one department/school to another
shall be initiated by the faculty member. This request shall be made in memo form
addressed to the faculty member’s college dean. The memo shall include a
justification for the transfer.
3. Approval Process
A. Request for transfer shall be forwarded by the faculty member’s college dean to the
department chair(s)/school director(s) of both the current department/school and the
department/school to which the transfer is requested (recipient department/school). If the

401

recipient department is outside the faculty member’s college, the request shall also be
forwarded to the dean of that college
B. The dean shall then consult and review the request with the two department chair(s)/school
director(s). If needed, the dean of the college who will be receiving the new faculty member
will also be consulted to determine the appropriateness, feasibility, and programmatic
implications of the transfer. If the transfer is deemed appropriate and feasible the request for
transfer will be
forwarded to the recipient department/school.
C. The recipient department/school shall vote on whether to recommend or not recommend
the transfer.
D. All tenured and tenure-track faculty members in the recipient department/school shall be
eligible to vote.
E. The vote shall be conducted by confidential ballot and require an affirmative vote of an
absolute majority of the tenure track members of the department/school for approval of
transfer to pass. [Note: a (majority in this context means 50% plus one of all tenure-track
members of the department/school irrespective of whether they cast a valid ballot.]
F. If the recipient department/school does not agree to the transfer the request shall
not be approved.
G. If the recipient department/school does agree to the transfer the college dean (or the
college deans jointly if a second college is involved) shall then make a recommendation to the
Vice President of Academic Affairs/Provost.
H. The Vice President/Provost shall make the final decision on whether to approve the transfer.
4. Faculty Rights and Status
Faculty members involved in transfers from one department/school to another within
the university shall retain all rights, including tenure and seniority, in their new
department/school.

402

FAM 670.5
IN-STATE TRAVEL
FAM 670.5 In-State Travel
A faculty member may travel in state on an academic workday* to attend professional meetings
provided the College Dean approves. Requests for in-state travel funds are submitted to
College offices on travel request forms. Present State regulations allow $46.00 per diem for
meals, lodging, and incidental expenses in a 24-hour period. Conferences registration fees up to
$50.00 can also be reimbursed; for fees in excess of this amount, or for more than two faculty
members at any single conference, prior authorization must be secured from the President's
designee (the Vice President for Academic Affairs/Provost).
Whenever possible, faculty are urged to use State vehicles available through the College. If a
private auto is used for in-state travel, reimbursement is provided according to a schedule
established by the State.
* Academic Work Days include: instructional days, preparation days, examination days,
registration days, evaluation days, commencement, and other days scheduled for such
purposes as faculty and departmental conferences, committee meetings, faculty development
activities, etc.

FAM 670.6
OUT-OF-STATE TRAVEL
FAM 670.6 Out of State Travel.pdf
A faculty member planning to travel out of state, on an academic workday* or when any part of
expenses are to be paid by the State, must submit a Request for Chancellor's Office Approval
(to leave the state) form. This form should be approved by the College Dean and the Vice
President for Academic Affairs/Provost in advance of travel. When out-of-state travel is
undertaken in fulfillment of duties as a State employee, any honorarium or fee paid to the
employee from an outside source for work done during regular working hours would be in
violation of the law. Therefore, the employee may either refuse the honorarium or fee and obtain
approval for the travel, receiving regular compensation, or the employee may request a leave of
absence without pay and accept the honorarium or fee.
If the travel extends over a number of days and the honorarium or fee is connected only with a
service rendered on one particular day, the employee may elect to accept the fee and not
receive State salary for that day. If the service is rendered by the employee after regular
working hours, the employee may submit a certificate stating that the fee received was for
services performed after regular working hours and may, thus, be permitted also to receive
State salary for that day. (UCAM 723)
403

Limited funds are available for out-of-state travel to participate in professional activities. To be
eligible for out-of-state travel funds, faculty must actively participate in a professional meeting as
chairman of a panel, panel discussant, officer of the organization, or presenter of a paper.
Funds are also available for trips certified by the President as essential to the College's
operations.
The allocation of out-of-state travel funds is the responsibility of the College Dean. All requests
for funds should be initiated at the College Office on forms provided for that purpose.
To request out-of-state travel, a faculty member should:
1. Obtain substantiation of the purpose of the trip (e.g., a letter from the organization, a copy of
the program which will indicate the nature of active participation).
2. Obtain from the College Office: (a) "Faculty Request for Out-of-State Travel Funds" (2
copies).
3. Complete the forms and forward them, with substantiation of the purpose of the trip, to
College Office in time to meet deadlines set by the College.
The College Dean will notify faculty of his action on each out-of-state travel request. When the
College Dean approves payment of full airfare, the College or Department/School Secretary will
order tickets through the College Business Office. When the Dean approves only partial
payment, the faculty member will make his/her own travel arrangements and may request an
advance through the College or Department/School Secretary.
No more than 30 days after completing the trip, the faculty member will provide the
transportation ticket stub to the College or Department/School Secretary who will initiate the
Travel Claim.
* Academic Work Days include: instructional days, preparation days, examination days,
registration days, evaluation days, commencement, and other days scheduled for such
purposes as faculty and departmental conferences, committee meetings, faculty development
activities, etc.

FAM 803.5
POLICY AND PROCEDURES CONCERNING ACADEMIC
DISHONESTY POLICY
FAM 803.5 Academic Dishonesty

404

Plagiarism and cheating are violations of the Student Conduct Code (see Appendix of the
CSUSB Bulletin of Courses) and may be dealt with by both the instructor and the Judicial Affairs
Officer. Definition and procedures for addressing cheating and plagiarism are found below.
Questions about academic dishonesty and the policy should be addressed to the Office of the
Vice President for Student Affairs.
Definition of plagiarism/cheating:
Plagiarism is the act of presenting the ideas and writings of another as one’s own
Cheating is the act of obtaining or attempting to obtain credit for academic work through
the use of any dishonest, deceptive, or fraudulent means.
Cheating includes but is not limited to:
1. Copying, in part or in whole, from another’s test, software, or other evaluation
instrument.
2. Submitting work previously graded in another course unless this has been approved
by the course instructor or by departmental/school policy.
3. Submitting work simultaneously presented in two courses, unless this has been
approved by both course instructors or by the department/school policies of both
departments/schools.
4. Using or consulting during an examination sources or materials not authorized by
the instructor.
5. Altering or interfering with grading or grading instructions.
6. Sitting for an examination by a surrogate, or as a surrogate.
7. Any other act committed by a student in the course of his or her academic work,
which defrauds or misrepresents, including aiding or abetting in any of the
actions defined above.
Plagiarism is academically dishonest and makes the offending student liable to penalties up to
and including expulsion. Students must make appropriate acknowledgements of the original
source where material written or compiled by another
is used.
Section 1: Academic dishonesty shall initially be addressed by the instructor, who may
employ any of the sanctions listed below in Section 3. The instructor shall then
complete a form that identifies the student who was found responsible, the general
nature of the offense, the action taken (if any), and a recommendation whether further
action should be considered by the Judicial Affairs Officer. The instructor shall send the
completed form (which may be found in Appendix A below) to the Judicial Affairs
Officer, care of the Office of the Vice President for Student Affairs.
Section 2: An instructor who takes any of the actions listed in Section 3 below has the
following responsibilities:

405

1. To preserve the evidence in support of the allegation
2. To notify the student of the allegation and of the evidence on which it is based
3. To provide the student a reasonable opportunity to challenge or rebut the
allegations
4. To notify the student of the action being taken
Section 3: The instructor may employ any of the following sanctions:
1. Verbal or written reprimand
2. Assignment or appropriate task or examination
3. Change of grade, including assigning a punitive grade to work involving
dishonesty, or for the course, project, thesis, or any other summary evaluation
of the student’s academic work
Section 4: If the student does not wish to accept the sanction proposed by the
instructor, the student may request and require that the allegation be referred to the
Judicial Affairs Officer. In that event, the procedures specified under Executive Order
628 (Student Disciplinary Procedures of the California State University) shall be
observed. The instructor shall not impose any sanction other than the sanction(s)
imposed through the disciplinary procedure.

Appendix A
EPRC
Reporting Form to Judicial Affairs for Academic Dishonesty
Name of faculty member completing the form: _____________________________
Contact information: e-mail address: ______________ phone extension:
______________
Department: ________________ Course Number: _______________
Course Title: _________________________________________________
Academic quarter: Fall Winter Spring Summer Year: _______________
Name of Student: __________________________ Student ID Number:
_____________
Date:_____________________________
Summary of the academic dishonesty issue including cheating or plagiarism:
Briefly describe action taken by the faculty member:
Recommendation to the Judicial Affairs Officer (JAO) as to whether or not
additional action should be considered:
Thank you for completing this form and the information submitted will be kept
confidential by the JAO. Faculty members must keep all evidence on academic

406

dishonesty for a minimum of one year period.
To submit the form to the Vice President of Student Affairs (VPSA) or designee for JAO, please
go to the following web address: http://academic-affairs.csusb.edu/eprc/default.html . If you
prefer to hand deliver this form, you may take it to Office of VPSA, University Hall 231, 5375185, Ext. 75185, or email it to
address "student-conduct@csusb.edu”
Note: This form complies with Chancellor’s Office Executive Order 1006.

FAM 803.65
STUDENT ACADEMIC GRIEVANCE PROCEDURES
FAM 803.65 Grade Grievance Policy.pdf
FAM 803.65-Searchable.pdf(Signed)
Table of Contents
Table of Contents 1
Purpose and Scope 1
Definitions 2
Procedure and Process 2
1. Basis and Procedures for Grade Appeal or Other Academic Grievance 2
2. College-Level Appeal Procedures 4
3. University-Level Appeal Procedures 5
4. Expectations and Consequences for Violation of Requirements Described Herein 12
Approvals 12
History 12
STUDENT ACADEMIC GRIEVANCE FORM 13
COLLEGE-LEVEL APPEAL FORM 16
UNIVERSITY-LEVEL APPEAL FORM 18
CONFIDENTIALITY AGREEMENT FOR STUDENT MEMBER OF THE HEARING
COMMITTEE 20
STUDENT REQUEST FOR AN EXTENSION OF TIME TO FILE A GRIEVANCE 21
Purpose and Scope
The policy and procedures specified herein deal with student grievances related to faculty
evaluation of student work, academic decisions made by departments and colleges, or
university decisions such as admission to majors and programs, academic probation,
suspension or dismissal from major or from the university.
This policy does not deal with all cases of academic grievance. The following cases are handled
407

Elsewhere:
1. Non-academic complaints such as those involving sexual harassment, discrimination, or
inappropriate social conduct unless those matters relate to a specific academic decision. Nonacademic complaints should be referred to the Vice President for Student Affairs. See Student
Non-Academic Grievance Policy and Procedures. See: https://www.csusb.edu/policies/studentnon-academic-grievance-policy-and-procedures
2. Academic grievances that allege Discrimination, Harassment or Retaliation, as defined
by Executive Order 1097; see https://calstate.policystat.com/policy/8453516/latest/
3. Academic grievances involving the grade of "W" (withdrawal from a class) .
If a student has filed a grievance using the procedures that apply under Executive Order 1097,
the Campus grade appeal procedure shall be placed in abeyance until such time as any appeal
processes under Executive Order 1097 (Article VI and/or VII) have concluded. In cases where
the EO-1097 investigation determines that EO-1097 was violated, then:
● For a grade grievance the Committee will proceed directly to Section 3.x.
of this policy, which authorizes a re-grading of the student’s work.
● In cases of other academic decisions, it is presumed that the determination
would have been made by the EO-1097 process.
In cases where the EO-1097 investigation does not determine that EO-1097 was violated,
students are to be directed to Section 2 of this policy and instructed to complete the grievance
form of this policy without seeking to obtain their instructor’s (or decision makers) signature.
POLICY STATEMENT
The purpose of this policy is to ensure that careful and equitable processes have been
followed in making matriculation and assessment decisions about students. This policy lays
out a procedure by which a student may challenge an academic decision the student perceives
as capricious.
Definitions
Academic Grievance Panel: The pool of 15 from which the Hearing Committee will be
drawn.
Hearing Committee: A committee of 4 drawn from the Academic Grievance Panel who
will hear the grievance.
Qualified Faculty: Faculty who are from the department or a closely related discipline of
the instructor of record and are presently on the CSUSB faculty.

408

Procedure and Process
1. Basis and Procedures for Grade Appeal or Other Academic Grievance
a. Basis for Appeal:
A student may appeal a final course grade or a grade on a Comprehensive Examination or a
project (e.g., art exhibition) or thesis required for graduation. An appeal may be initiated
when a student believes there has been any of the following:
i. Clerical error
ii. Capricious or prejudicial evaluation
iii. Inconsistent or inequitably applied standards for evaluation
Along with the right to assign grades, faculty have the responsibility to provide careful
evaluation and timely assignment of grades. There is a presumption that grades assigned
are correct and that faculty will base grades on clearly stated criteria. It is the
responsibility of anyone appealing an assigned grade to demonstrate otherwise.
b. Types of Academic Appeal in Addition to Grade Grievances:
Students may also appeal other types of academic decisions. These include, but are not
limited to:
i. Denial of Admission to or Dismissal from a course, major or program
ii. Placement on Academic Probation
iii. Suspension or Dismissal from the University
It is presumed that such decisions result from consistent, fair, and equitable application of
clearly articulated standards and procedures. Students appealing such decisions must
demonstrate that the standards and procedures were not clearly stated or that
they were not applied in a consistent, fair and equitable manner. An appeal based on
a disagreement with the standards and procedures themselves will be denied a
hearing.
c. Informal Resolution of Academic Grievances:
Every effort should be made to settle the disagreement informally. This document is
not intended to limit a student, faculty member, or department from resolving a
problem in any informal way they find satisfactory. However; the college level appeal
procedures outlined in Section 2 must be exhausted before a student may initiate the
University-level procedures described in Section 3.
d. Extension of Time Limits:
Time limits cited in these procedures may be extended up to 80 days when
extenuating circumstances exist (e.g., the student is incapacitated in an accident).

409

The Provost/Vice President of Academic Affairs or designee will make such
determinations upon consultation with the department chair or director.
2. College-Level Appeal Procedures
a. Informal Resolution and Initiation of the Formal Process:
Grade Grievance procedures must be initiated by the student by the following deadlines (or the
next working day if the campus is closed).
•For grade grievances that occur in the Fall semester, the formal grievance must be filed
by the last business day of the sixth week of the Spring semester.
•For grade grievances that occur in the Winter intersession, the formal grievance must
be
filed by the last business day of the seventh week of the Spring semester.
•For grade grievances that occur in the Spring semester, the formal grievance must be
filed by the last business day of the sixth week of the Fall semester.
•For grade grievances that occur during any summer session (I, II, full), the formal
grievance must be filed by the last business day of the seventh week of the Fall
semester.
Grade grievances involving a change of grade from an incomplete must be lodged
within fifty (50) calendar days of notification of the grade change.
Other types of Academic Grievances must be lodged within fifty (50) working days of
notification of any decision which the student seeks to appeal. It should be noted that
faculty members and department chairs may not be available during the summer.
Prior to filing a formal grade appeal or other academic grievance, the student shall seek
redress directly from the instructor, or for other academic grievances, the decision maker.
If the instructor is no longer at the University, the student should contact the Department
Chair or Director to attempt to resolve the issue.
If, after consultation with the Department Chair or Director, the student is not satisfied
and wishes to pursue the matter further, the student shall complete pages one and two of
the Student Academic Grievance Form, which is also available in hard copy in each college
office. The student will then submit the form to the college office who will date-stamp the
form. Submission and acceptance of this form officially initiates the procedure.
The form shall then be sent to the instructor of record, or for other academic grievances
the decision maker within three working days for the instructor's written comments, which
must be returned to the college office within 14 working days of the date of receipt by the
instructor. The college office shall then furnish a copy of the grievance form with the
instructor's comments to the student within five (5) working days of receiving it.
b. College Level:
If, after informal conversations, the grievance is unresolved, the student next may seek

410

redress through a meeting with the instructor, the Department Chair, and the College Dean
(or designee). In this meeting, only the involved parties shall be present. The student must
request the meeting within seven (7) working days from the date the process under
Section 1 is concluded. The meeting shall be convened by the College Dean or designee as
soon as possible, but within no more than twenty (20) working days. In cases involving a
grade appeal, the Department Chair or Director and College Dean will consult with the
instructor of record, who has the sole discretion to change a grade at this stage, consistent
with this policy. The College Dean or designee shall note the conclusion reached on the
College's and student's copy of the Student Academic Grievance Form, return the
appropriate copy to the student and instructor, and retain the College copy on file.
3. University-Level Appeal Procedures
a. Submission of a University-Level Appeal:
If dissatisfied with the outcome of the College level procedure (Section 2), a student may initiate
University-level appeal procedures by requesting that the previously completed Student
Academic Grievance Form be submitted to the Office of the Provost and Vice President of
Academic Affairs or designee. The Office of the Provost and Vice President of Academic Affairs
will provide the student a time-stamped copy of the submitted form. The request must be filed
within fifteen (15) working days (excluding time between terms) following completion of the
College- level procedures.
b. University-Level Procedural Review:
Within (10) working days of the filing of this request, the Provost and Vice President of
Academic Affairs, or designee, shall determine whether the procedures of Section 2 have taken
place. If all efforts to resolve the matter without a hearing have been completed, the Provost and
Vice President of Academic Affairs or designee shall initiate selection of a Hearing Committee.
The Hearing Committee shall then be selected within (10) working days.
c. University-Level Review:
There shall be a standing Academic Grievance Panel of fifteen (15) members: five (5)
tenured faculty (one from each college), five (5) undergraduate students, and five (5)
graduate students.
i. The five tenured faculty members shall be elected by the faculty of their
colleges, using the established procedures of the Faculty Senate
and will serve staggered two- year terms. Faculty serving on College or
University RPT Committees shall not be eligible to serve on the Academic
Grievance Panel. Faculty eligible to serve shall not have had an academic
grievance upheld against them within the prior two years and shall not be
party to any current grade grievance.
ii. The five undergraduate students shall be appointed to one year terms by

411

the Board of Directors of the Associated Students, Incorporated (ASI)
through its established procedures for appointments to faculty-affiliated
committees with the following additional criteria: To be eligible to serve, the students
must have a minimum overall GPA of 3.0, no disciplinary actions on record, including no
violations of academic integrity, have attained junior class standing, and have been
matriculated as a student at CSUSB for at least one term.
iii. The five graduate students shall be appointed to one-year terms by the Board of
Directors of the Associated Students, Incorporated through its established procedures
for appointments to faculty-affiliated committees. To be eligible to serve, the students
must be classified graduate students, conditionally classified graduate students or
classified post-baccalaureate students, and must have a minimum overall GPA of 3.0,
have no disciplinary actions on record, including no violations of academic
integrity, and have been matriculated as a student at CSUSB for at least
one term.
iv. Terms of office for student members shall begin on October 1 and end on September
30, or upon completion of any hearing in progress as of that date.
v. The two-year terms of office for faculty members shall begin and end
in the same time frame established for Faculty Senate committees.
vi. In the event a member is unable to complete the term of office, a
replacement shall be elected or appointed to complete the unexpired
term, following the original appointment procedures.
d. Selection of the Grievance Hearing Committee
Within ten (10) working days of initiating selection of the Hearing Committee, the Provost
and Vice President of Academic Affairs, or designee, shall meet with the student who is
appealing and with the instructor of record. If the instructor of record is on leave of
absence or is no longer at the University, the Chair or Director of the Academic
Department (or designee) shall represent the instructor throughout these procedures.
Two (2) faculty and two (2) student names shall be drawn at random from the roster of
the Academic Grievance Panel. Either the appealing student or the instructor may veto
one of the names drawn. Another name will be drawn at random from the representative panel
pool to replace the excluded member. No more than one exclusion is permitted for either the
student or the faculty member. The four representatives shall constitute the Hearing Committee
and there shall be no further challenges.
i. If the student who is appealing chooses not to sign the release of information section
of the Student Academic Grievance Form, the Hearing Committee shall have no student
members and the size of the Hearing Committee shall be reduced accordingly. Student
members of the Hearing Committee will be required to complete the Confidentiality

412

Agreement, stating that they will hold all aspects of the proceedings in confidence (see
form at end of this policy).
ii. If the student who is appealing is an undergraduate, only the undergraduate students
on the roster of the Academic Grievance Panel are eligible to serve on the Committee. If
the student who is appealing is a post-baccalaureate student, only the graduate and
post-baccalaureate students on the roster of the Academic Grievance Panel are eligible
to serve on the Hearing Committee.
e. Selection of Convener of the Hearing Committee
The Vice President of Academic Affairs or designee shall designate one of the faculty
members selected to serve on the Hearing Committee as convener of the Hearing
Committee. The names of the other members of the Hearing Committee and the Student
Academic Grievance Form shall be forwarded to the convener.
f. Convening the Hearing Committee
The faculty member shall convene the Hearing Committee within fifteen (15) working days.
The Hearing Committee shall select its own Chair from among the faculty members on the
Hearing Committee. It should be noted that students and faculty members on the Hearing
Committee are not available during the summer.
g. Approving Request
Deliberating in private and based solely upon review of the Student Academic Grievance
Form, the Hearing Committee shall determine whether to approve the request for a
hearing.
To approve the request for a hearing, the material submitted by the student must persuade
the Hearing Committee that a hearing is warranted. The Hearing Committee shall be guided by
the CSUSB policy that the grade awarded by the instructor and academic decisions made by
departments and colleges are presumed to be correct unless the student, upon whom the
burden of proof falls, is able to demonstrate otherwise in the material and documentation
submitted.
Mere protestations of capriciousness or prejudice, unsupported by substantive
information or argument, shall not be persuasive.
i. If the request for a hearing is denied, the grievance shall be terminated, and the
Chair of the Hearing Committee shall notify the student, the instructor, and College
Dean. The records shall be deposited and retained in the Office of the Vice
President of Academic Affairs or designee.
ii. If the request for a hearing is approved, the Hearing Committee shall schedule

413

the hearing within fifteen (15) working days and reach its decision within no more
than five (5) working days after the hearing. The Chair shall notify the student and
the instructor of the date, time, and place of the hearing.
h. Conducting the Hearing
The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the following guidelines:
i. The hearing shall be closed and only the following persons may be
present:
a) The members of the Hearing Committee, and
b) The student who is appealing and a non-legal representative if any, and
c) The instructor and a non-legal representative if any, and
d) Witnesses, while presenting evidence.
Students who have a verified disability, as determined by Services to Students
with Disabilities, and require accommodation(s) to participate in the hearing shall
be provided appropriate accommodation(s) (e.g., American Sign Language
interpreters, etc.).
Instructors who have a verified disability, as determined by the Americans with
Disabilities Act), who require accommodation(s) to participate in the hearing,
shall be provided appropriate accommodation(s).
ii. A recording of the Hearing shall not be made unless requested by either
party.
iii. Any document received into evidence shall be preserved and shall be
attached to the report form of the Hearing Committee. Both the student and
the instructor shall have the opportunity to have a reasonable opportunity to
challenge or to rebut the evidence. At the discretion of the Hearing
Committee, copies may be given to either parties.
iv. All persons present at the hearing shall be advised by the Chair that the
proceedings are confidential, that all evidence submitted is required to be
accurate and truthful, that all parties present are required to comport
themselves in an orderly fashion, and that any violations of these
requirements may be cause for University disciplinary action, with unruly
behavior cause for removal from the Hearing. Witnesses will be advised as
to these requirements before presenting testimony.
v. The proceeding will not be bound by formal rules of evidence or trial-like

414

procedures. Rather, the procedures will be those that reasonable persons
customarily use in the conduct of serious affairs.
a. The chair shall rule upon all procedural issues.
b. If procedural issues arise which require external assistance, the Chair
may delay or recess the proceedings pending submission of the issue to
the Vice President of Academic Affairs or designee for resolution. The
decision of the Vice President of Academic Affairs or designee shall be
final.
vi. Evidence or testimony shall be limited to that which is relevant to the issue(s).
Irrelevant or unduly repetitious evidence or testimony may be ruled out of order.
The burden of proof to sustain a grievance rests with the student, and the student
first will present his/her case.
a. If the student fails to appear at the time and place of the hearing
without advance notice and/or reasonable explanation, the grievance
shall be considered to have been withdrawn and these proceedings shall
be terminated. The Chair shall notify the student and the instructor and
shall submit a report to the Vice President of Academic Affairs or
designee.
b. If the instructor fails to appear at the time and place scheduled for the
hearing, without advance notice and/or reasonable explanation, the
hearing shall proceed to its conclusion as though the instructor was
present.
c. If it is determined by the Hearing Committee Chair that either the
student or the instructor failed to appear because of circumstances
beyond his/her control, the Hearing Committee may take whatever action
it deems appropriate to ensure fairness.
vii. The Hearing Committee shall consider only the issues and evidence
submitted during the hearing. The Hearing Committee may request either
party to present additional evidence or testimony during the hearing which
would assist the Hearing Committee in arriving at a fair and impartial
conclusion.
viii. Both the student and the instructor shall have the following rights:
a) To be present during the hearing.
b) To be confronted with all evidence received by the Hearing Committee,
whether oral or documentary.
c) The opportunity to challenge or to rebut such evidence.
d) To submit evidence on behalf of their own position.
e) The opportunity to submit a summary argument and to respond to the
argument of the opposing party.
ix. Hearing Committee Deliberations
Upon conclusion of the hearing, the Hearing Committee shall deliberate in private. For the

415

filed grievance to succeed, a majority of the Hearing Committee members must agree to
sustain the grievance. There is a presumption that the grade assigned by the instructor of
record or the academic decision made by the department, college, or university is correct.
Thus, the burden of proof to the contrary rests with the student who is appealing. To find in
favor of the student, the Hearing Committee must reach a conclusion that the original grade was
incorrectly or improperly assigned OR that the original academic decision was based on
inconsistent, unfair, or inequitable application of existing university procedures and policies.
x. Assigning Grades
In the event the Hearing Committee concludes that a change of grade should be effected,
the faculty members on the Hearing Committee shall arrive at a decision as to what grade
should be assigned. (For policy on how to form this committee, see Section 3c.)
In the event there is a finding under EO-1097 that EO-1097 has been violated under the
separate procedures for that executive order, the faculty members on the Hearing
Committee shall arrive at a decision to what grade should be assigned. (Please see EO-1097
for guidance on pursuing a grievance under EO-1097; a EO-1097 grievance can be filed
concurrently with an academic grievance filed under this FAM).
In arriving at a grade change decision or if the grade change requires a re-evaluation of the
student’s course work, the Hearing Committee may consult with qualified faculty. Qualified
faculty will have 30 working days to re-evaluate the student’s coursework.
i. Student members of the Hearing Committee shall not participate in
the assignment of grades.
ii. Both faculty and students may participate in reaching conclusions for
other types of academic decisions which have been appealed.
xi. Notification of Decision and Disposition
The Chair of the Hearing Committee shall notify the Provost and Vice President of Academic
Affairs or designee in writing of the decision within five (5) working days following the Hearing
Committee’s decision. All written records pertaining to the Hearing Committee’s decision shall
be deposited and retained in the Office of the Vice President of Academic Affairs or designee.
i. The Provost and Vice President of Academic Affairs or designee shall notify the student, the
instructor, and College Dean of the decision of the Hearing Committee.
ii. In the event the decision of the committee is to change the assigned grade, and the instructor
of record is unwilling or unable to assign the new grade, the faculty members on the Hearing
Committee shall complete and sign the change of grade form. The Provost and Vice President
for Academic Affairs or designee shall ensure that the grade on the student's permanent record
is changed.

416

xii. Appeals
I. Either the student or the instructor may appeal the decision of the Hearing Committee
to the Provost and Vice President for Academic Affairs or designee. The sole basis of
such an appeal shall be that the Hearing Committee so substantially departed from the
guidelines and procedures set forth herein as to have seriously prejudiced the outcome.
ii. The Provost and Vice President for Academic Affairs or designee may:
a. reject the appeal, in which case the decision of the Hearing Committee
shall be final, or.
b. meet with the Hearing Committee to re-evaluate the procedures that
were followed; if it is determined that there was a procedural error, the
Hearing Committee reconsiders the grievance, and submits a decision
to the Provost and Vice President for Academic Affairs or designee.
This decision is final
xiii. Retention of Records
The Office of the Provost and Vice President of Academic Affairs or designee shall retain the
records of the grade appeal hearing for a period of three (3) calendar years.
xiv. Annual Report of Case Dispositions
The Academic Grievance Panel shall report annually to the President of the University and
to the Faculty Senate the number of grade appeal hearings requested and the disposition
of each case.
4. Expectations and Consequences for Violation of Requirements Described Herein
All persons involved in the proceedings are required to maintain confidentiality, to be
accurate and truthful in all statements and evidence submitted, and to comport themselves
in an orderly fashion. Any violation of these requirements shall constitute grounds for University
disciplinary action.
Approvals
Approved by the Faculty Senate on April 13. 2021
Approved by the President on _________________________
History
First created by EPRC:
Revised by EPRC: 2021

417

CALIFORNIA STATE UNIVERSITY, SAN BERNARDINO
STUDENT ACADEMIC GRIEVANCE FORM
(Please prepare two copies)
Name _Telephone_ _
Street Address _ City _ Zip
I. FOR FILING A GRADE GRIEVANCE
Department __Course No._ Course Title _
Instructor Term Course Was Taken _ _
II. FOR APPEAL OF OTHER ACADEMIC DECISION
16
Nature of decision under appeal:
Date of decision: _ Person Making the Decision: _ _
Title or Position: _
Student’s Statement
1. Following provisions of the Student Academic Grievance Procedures (FSD 69_41) I believe
I should have received the following grade or decision:
The basis for my grievance
is1): _ _ _
___
_
17
____
___
_
Date Signed _Student’s Signature _

418

(OPTIONAL) I hereby authorize student members of the Student Academic Grievance Hearing
Committee to have access to information and materials contained in my University records as
they pertain to this case, following provisions of FSD 69_41.
Date Signed _Student’s Signature _
2. Is an EO-1097 grievance (see page one of the Student Academic Grievance Procedures)
being filed
concurrently with this grade or academic grievance?
Yes
No
18
FOR OFFICE USE (Retention in College Dean’s Office, three years)
Date this form was filed in the Office of the College Dean:
Date grade recorded in the Records Office:
CALIFORNIA STATE UNIVERSITY, SAN BERNARDINO
STUDENT ACADEMIC GRIEVANCE FORM
(Please prepare two copies)
Name _Telephone_ _
Street Address _ City _ Zip
I. FOR FILING A GRADE GRIEVANCE
Department __Course No._ Course Title _
Instructor Term Course Was Taken _ _
II. FOR APPEAL OF OTHER ACADEMIC DECISION
16
Nature of decision under appeal:
Date of decision: _ Person Making the Decision: _ _
Title or Position: _

419

Student’s Statement
1. Following provisions of the Student Academic Grievance Procedures (FSD 69_41) I believe
I should have received the following grade or decision:
The basis for my grievance
is1): _ _ _
___
_
17
____
___
_
Date Signed _Student’s Signature _
(OPTIONAL) I hereby authorize student members of the Student Academic Grievance Hearing
Committee
to have access to information and materials contained in my University records as they pertain
to this case,
following provisions of FSD 69_41.
Date Signed _Student’s Signature _
2. Is an EO-1097 grievance (see page one of the Student Academic Grievance Procedures)
being filed
concurrently with this grade or academic grievance?
Yes
No
18
FOR OFFICE USE (Retention in College Dean’s Office, three years)
Date this form was filed in the Office of the College Dean:
Date grade recorded in the Records Office:
19

420

COLLEGE-LEVEL APPEAL FORM
(Not required if an EO 1097 grievance was filed.)
Instructor’s Review
Date Submitted for Review:
Results of the Instructor review:
Review Date
Instructor’s Signature_ _
I request a meeting with the instructor of record , the Department Chair, and the College Dean
(or designee).
***************************************************
College Dean’s Review Date Submitted for Review:
Results of the Dean’s review:
Review Date
College Dean’s or Designee’s Signature _ _
20
CALIFORNIA STATE UNIVERSITY, SAN BERNARDINO
UNIVERSITY-LEVEL APPEAL FORM
I request that my Academic Student Academic Grievance Form filed at the College be
submitted for an University-Level Appeal
Student signature to initiate university-level appeal: __ _
If an EO-1097 grievance was filed, was there a finding that EO-1097 was violated?
Yes
No
Signature of Title IX or DHR Coordinator: _
Date Grade Posted _ _

421

Date Grievance Filed in Office of the College Dean (Not required if an EO 1097 grievance was
filed.)
_
Date Filed with Vice President for Academic Affairs/Provost or designee (Not required if an EO
1097 grievance
was filed.):_ _ __
By:
Committee Selection Date: _
21
By:
Committee Members and Convener: _ _ _
___
___
Hearing request _ _denied or _approved (Cite reason if hearing is denied and inform College
Dean) (Not required if an EO 1097 grievance was filed.):
Date of Hearing (Not required if an EO 1097 grievance was filed.):
Committee Decision:
22
Date Committee Chair and College Dean notified of final disposition of this appeal:
By_ Date _
23
CALIFORNIA STATE UNIVERSITY, SAN BERNARDINO
CONFIDENTIALITY AGREEMENT FOR STUDENT MEMBER OF
THE HEARING COMMITTEE
I agree that all proceedings and any records or documents provided for the purpose of the
academic

422

grievance in which I participate will be held in confidence throughout and after the hearing. I
understand that
a failure to do so could subject me to disciplinary action.
Name (Printed): ________________________________________________
Signature: _____________________________________________________
Date: _________________________
24
CALIFORNIA STATE UNIVERSITY, SAN BERNARDINO
STUDENT REQUEST FOR AN EXTENSION OF TIME TO FILE A
GRIEVANCE
I am requesting an extension to file an academic grievance in accordance with FAM policy
803.65.
The reason I am requesting this extension (please specify): ___________________________
____________________________________________________________________________
_
I am requesting an extension until--specify a date that is no more than 80 calendar days after
the grade or
other decision is recorded (or the next working day if the campus is closed) :
____________________
Name (Printed): ________________________________________________
Signature: _____________________________________________________
Today’s Date: _________________________
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Action of VPAA
___ Approve extension
___ Deny extension
Signature of VPAA/Provost: ____________________________________
25
FLOW CHART OF GRIEVANCE PROCESS is attached

423

FAM 805.2 ACADEMIC ADVISING POLICY
FAM 805.2 Academic Advising Policy

I. The responsibilities for student advising are distributed as follows:
A. Each student is responsible to know and meet graduation requirements and other
requirements contained in the Bulletin, Class Schedule, and other publications. Further,
each student needs to make every reasonable effort to obtain academic advising.
B. The office of Admissions and Records is responsible for providing accurate and timely
transfer credit summaries, transcripts, and other necessary student records prior to the
time of advisement.
C. Declared majors should receive their primary academic advising from their college or
major department or program. Each college, department/school or program may
organize its advising program in a manner best suited to its unique requirements and in
conformity with the policies stated in this document. Departments/Schools or programs
with degree programs at the satellite campus in Palm Desert will be responsible for
coordinating on-site advising for their students.
D. Undeclared students will receive their primary academic advising from Advising and
Academic Services. These students will be encouraged to declare a major or college of
interest prior to completing 45 units of course work.
E. All students should confer with an advisor on a regular basis, specifically:
1. All students in freshman status are required to attend an Academic
Information session and meet with an advisor prior to their first registration.
2. All transfer students are required to attend an Academic Information session
and meet with an advisor prior to their first registration.
3. All students are strongly encouraged to meet with an advisor each
quarter of attendance.
4. All undergraduate students on first-time academic probation must confer
with an Academic Advising Center advisor prior to registration and
adhere to that advisor's specific recommendations designed to improve
their grade point average. 5. Students in categories 1, 2 and 4 who have
not received advising during their first quarter or first quarter on
academic probation will not be permitted to register.

424

II. The functions of academic advising include assisting students in the
following areas:
A. To understand policies, procedures, and programs of California
State University, San Bernardino (CSUSB);
B. To develop a comprehensive educational plan;
C. To understand General Education and graduation
requirements;
D. To make appropriate use of the wide range of services and
educational opportunities relevant to their educational objectives
at CSUSB;
E. To explore career options within their disciplines;
F. To explore major career alternatives (The University will
maintain special career advisement programs to provide
assistance to students in this area.);
G. To understand the possible short- and long-range
consequences of their choices.
III. Academic advising is based upon complex policies, procedures,
publications, and services that are supervised on a University-wide basis
by the Dean of Undergraduate Studies who is responsible for:
A. Coordinating the many components of the academic advising
program, including each academic college, program or
department/school, and Academic Advising Center;
B. Reviewing and evaluating the academic advising program;
C. Developing appropriate procedures for the academic advising
program; and
D. Arranging for additional resources to assist
departments/schools or programs with disproportionately high
ratios of majors to faculty members.
IV. The responsibility for providing yearly orientation regarding advising
for faculty shall re st with the College Dean.
V. The responsibility for implementing the advisement policy within an
academic department or program rests with the department chair/school
director or program coordinator under the supervision of the college
dean. In order to facilitate faculty-student advisement, advising holds
may be placed on a student's computer file at any time by the

425

department/school or program. Theseholds can only be released by the
academic department/school or program. The chairs will provide:
A. A clear delineation of responsibility for academic advising;
B. A system for maintaining advising files of majors in the
department/school or program; and
C. Information about the various majors/programs to students
through a brochure, handbook, and/or checklist of major/degree
requirements.
VI. Advising and Academic Services will:
A. Gather and disseminate appropriate academic advising
material to assist college, department/school, and program
advising coordinators;
B. Act as a referral service and information center for colleges,
departments/schools, programs, and students;
C. Be familiar with campus wide advising problems and formulate
suggestions for improvements of the advising program;
D. Provide academic advising, orientation, and in-service training
for faculty members and advising coordinators;
E. Be responsible for and coordinate the academic advising
program for undeclared majors; and
F. Coordinate advising and counseling services for students on
academic probation or subject to disqualification in cooperation
with academic units.
G. Coordinate Academic Information sessions for all new
freshmen and transfer students and review the mandatory Basic
Skills policy.
VII. Students shall have the opportunity to evaluate academic
advising in which they have participated under procedures
recommended by the Faculty Senate.
The results of these evaluations may be included in the personnel
file exclusively at the discretion of the faculty member.
VIII. Academic advising is a major responsibility of faculty and
should be integrally related to the educational process. Academic
advising shall be a specific item of review in the evaluation
process.

426

FAM 805.4
FACULTY ADVISORS TO STUDENT ORGANIZATIONS
FAM 805.4 Faculty Advisors to Student Organizations
The College requires that each "recognized" student group have an advisor. A faculty
member's service is voluntary and is to be undertaken only upon mutual agreement
between him and the student group. Members of the faculty who wish to sponsor
student groups are invited to confer with the Dean of Students. Faculty advisors are not
personally responsible for individual or group actions which are illegal, inappropriate or
in violation of College policy, except to point out such violation to the students and
suggest appropriate action.
Last Revision: Admin

FAM 806.43
CONSTITUTIONAL ANIMAL CARE AND USE COMMITTEE
FAM 806.43 Animal Care and Use Committee

Function
The Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (I.A.C.U.C.) is a body appointed by the Chief
Executive Officer of the Institution to oversee implementation and adherence to the Public
Health Service Policy on Humane Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and the Animal Welfare
Act.
Membership
Members are appointed by the Chief Executive Officer of the Institution for two year terms and
must include: 1) one Doctor of Veterinary Medicine, with training or experience in laboratory
animal science and medicine, who has direct or delegated program responsibility for activities
involving animals at the institution, 2) one practicing scientist experienced in research involving
animals, 3) one member whose primary concerns are in a nonscientific area, 4) a member of
the Environmental Health and Safety Office; and 5) one individual who is not affiliated with the
institution other than as a member of the IACUC, and is not a member of the immediate family
of a person who is affiliated with the institution. In addition to the above (which are required to
meet the minimum federal requirements), this institution will include: the Dean of Graduate

427

Studies and Research, a representative of the animal care technical staff and at least one
student representative. All members have voting rights. The Dean of Graduate Studies shall
serve as Chair.
Animal Use Proposal Review
Procedures involving any live, vertebrate animal for use in research, research training,
experimentation, or biological testing or for related purposes must be approved by the
IACUC prior to performing the proposed procedure(s). Protocols are submitted on a standard
application form and reviewed for compliance with OPRR, USDA and other applicable
guidelines, codes and regulations. Approval requires a majority vote of the IACUC. Meetings are
held each quarter, or as needed; minutes of committee deliberations recorded and written
results of the protocol review are forwarded to the applicant within one week of the meeting.
Should a protocol not be approved, the IACUC will submit a written list of concerns to the
applicant within one week. A written response will be required of the applicant before the
protocol can be reconsidered. Additional information, procedure modification or deletion may be
required to comply with federal guidelines and thus gain approval. The applicant or a qualified
representative should attend all meetings during which a submitted protocol is under Review.
Communication
Completed Animal Use Proposals must be submitted to the committee Chair at least two weeks
before the meeting in which the protocol is to be considered. Incomplete protocols will be
returned to the applicant without review. Agendas and protocols are mailed to all committee
members one week prior to scheduled meetings. Agendas are similarly mailed to applicants
who have submitted protocols for review. Copies of approved minutes to the meetings are
mailed to all committee members and kept on file in the office of the Dean of Graduate Studies.
Responsibility for Animals
CSUSB employs a state-licensed Registered Veterinary Technician on a full-time basis. It is the
responsibility of the RVT to inspect all animals, coordinate Vivarium student assistants,
coordinate ordering and receiving of all animals and supplies, and to serve as liaison with the
consulting veterinarian on all matters of animal health, care and housing. The daily feeding,
cleaning and care of all vertebrates used for research, teaching, and testing at CSUSB shall be
the responsibility of Vivarium staff. The RVT or the RVT's designee shall conduct federallyrequired daily inspections of the animals.
Assurance of Compliance
In order to ensure compliance with all aspects of the federal laws governing animals use
following offices should be made aware of the program: Sponsored Programs, Graduate
Studies, Purchasing Department, Receiving, Radiation Safety Committee and the Chemical
Hygiene Committee.

428

FAM 807.3
POLICY REGARDING SUBJECT MATTER ASSESSMENT
FAM 807.3 Subject Matter Assessment [REPEALED]
I. Representatives of each approved teaching major (hereafter referred to as the
department) in California will establish criteria and procedures (e.g., oral and/or written
exam) for assessing the subject matter competence of student teaching candidates.
The Ad Hoc Teacher Preparation Committee of the Faculty Senate shall be responsible for
approving these procedures and criteria. The departmental procedures and criteria for
assessment shall be reviewed at least once every three years. The departmental review must
be submitted to the Ad Hoc Teacher Preparation Committee, and any changes in the
procedures and criteria must be approved by that Committee no later than the eighth week of
the quarter prior to implementation.
The assessment shall deal with subject matter competence only. The focus will be on the quality
of the candidate's academic skills. If the department does not certify the subject matter
competence of the candidate, the recommendation form sent to the college of Education must
include a list of the specific deficiencies and problems noted in the assessment and proposed
methods of remedying the situation.
The candidate may seek certification of subject matter a maximum of three times. Prior to
repeating the assessment in a subsequent quarter, the candidate should seek departmental
advising. A reevaluation conducted because of a tie vote of the committee does not apply to the
limit of three assessment attempts.
The following campus procedures are established:
A. Students may be assessed after they have completed the requirements for the major
and no later than the quarter prior to the term in which they plan to enter student
teaching. Students will complete a registration form for the assessment in the college of
Education when they obtain a portfolio. Students must submit a portfolio in the quarter
they plan to be assessed.
B. Students will be advised by the college of Education that they must contact the
department by the end of the second full week of classes to arrange for the assessment.
C. The registration forms completed by the students who will be assessed that term will
be sent to the department by the end of the first full week of classes for the quarter.
D. Students will submit completed portfolios to the Teacher Education Department by
the end of the fourth week of the quarter.
E. Overall GPAs will be computed by the college of Education by the end of the sixth
week. Only CSUSB students will have their GPA in the major noted on the transcript
summary provided to the department.

429

F. The departments are responsible for obtaining from the college of Education at the
end of the sixth week the candidates' subject matter assessment files which contain
transcripts, summary worksheets and applications.
G. The assessment should take place no later than the end of the eighth week of the
quarter.
H. The results of the assessment shall be forwarded by the department to the student
upon completion of the assessment.
I. Certification of subject matter competence based on the assessment procedures shall
be sent to the Chair of the Teacher Education Department no later than the first day of
the ninth week. A recommendation must be made for each candidate, even if the
department assessment procedures allowed the candidate to be certified without a
written or oral exam. A copy of the recommendation shall be retained by the department.
J. The candidates will be notified by the college of Education at the end of the final
examination period regarding admission into student teaching.
II. The appeal process is composed of three possible stages:
1) The subject area Department Chair;
2) the college Dean; and
3) the Associate Vice President for Academic Programs.
The use of stages 2 and 3 are dependent on the outcome in the prior stages.
III. Appeal procedures for subject matter competence assessments are as
follows:
1. The decision of the departmental committee recommending denial of entry to student
teaching should provide clear reasons for rejection, a list of specific deficiencies and problems
noted in the results, and proposed methods of correcting the situation, e.g., specific courses,
level of proficiency needed, reexamination, etc.
2. Students wishing to discuss the results of the assessment should first contact the Chair of the
department involved to obtain clarification of the reasons for the denial, explore possible
alternatives for remediation and removal of deficiencies, and establish a timeline for meeting the
criteria and competencies prior to subsequent reassessment.
3. Students who still wish to pursue a formal appeal after discussing the assessment with the
department Chair must submit to the department a written request for reconsideration or appeal.
This document shall contain a specific list of grievances which the candidate wishes to have
considered.
4. If the department Chair finds that the arguments made by the student are compelling and
convincing, the department Chair shall consult with the department committee and may then call
for a timely reexamination by a different panel, or may reject the appeal. In the case where the

430

Chair was a member of the original assessment panel, the Dean of the college shall act as the
Chair.
5. If the candidate is still unsatisfied, he/she may resubmit the written appeal to the Dean of the
college involved and set up an appointment to discuss the case. After meeting with the student
and reviewing the facts, the Dean will decide whether to recommend retest, call for additional
consultation with the department, or uphold the decision of the department in the denial.
6. Further appeal of procedures may be made outside the college to the Associate Vice
President for Academic Programs. Denial at the University level will require the candidate to
retake the exam in a subsequent term after following the conditions for removal of
deficiencies established by the department.

FAM 807.65 RECOMMENDATIONS ON ATTIRE FOR STUDENTS IN ON-CAMPUS
SIMULATION OR CLINICAL SUPERVISION CLASSES
FAM 807.65 Student Attire
Departments/Schools or programs may provide recommendations for Professional
Attire in on-campus simulation or clinical supervision classes provided:
A. Such standards for attire are established by the Professional Association affiliated
with that Department/School or program.
B. Recommendations are communicated to students at the time of admission to the
Professional Program and are further delineated in the course syllabi for the simulation
or clinical supervision courses.
C. All such recommendations for attire in simulation or clinical supervision courses on
campus provide reasonable accommodations for traditional ethnic, cultural, or religious
attire.

FAM 817.2 THE ACADEMIC YEAR
FAM 817.2 The Academic Year

The academic year consists of three consecutive quarters of approximately the same length,
and includes the periods of advising, registration, examination, and related activities (e.g.,
faculty meetings, commencement). The President, after consultation, fixes the beginning and
ending dates of the academic year. The President also sets all College academic holidays, which
431

are published annually in the College catalog. Faculty are required to be present or available for
duty throughout the academic year, except during official College holidays or academic
recesses.

Administrative Code - Sections 42700, 42800

FAM 818.4
POLICY ON COURSES OFFERED AS A PART OF THE REGULAR UNIVERSITY
PROGRAM AT THE COACHELLA VALLEY CENTER
FAM 818.4 Courses Offered at Coachella Valley Center [Repealed]

The Coachella Valley Center is a recognized satellite campus of the University not subject to the
reporting requirements in FSD 75-268, Rev I (Policy on Off-Campus Courses). Courses and
programs previously approved by the Faculty Senate may be offered at the Coachella Valley
Center, subject to the prior written approval of the relevant department head or coordinator,
college dean, and the Coachella Valley Center Director. Courses and programs not previously
regularly approved on the main campus may not be offered at the Coachella Valley Center.
When courses or programs are offered for the first time at the Coachella Valley Center, the
Center Director shall forward a memorandum to the University Curriculum Committee, the
Council of Academic Deans, and the Office of Academic Programs as an information item. The
memorandum shall specify the proposed initial course and/or program offerings, and be
signed by the affected chair/coordinator, dean, and the Center Director.

FAM 818.5
GUIDELINES AND PROCEDURES FOR STUDENT PETITIONS TO DROP A COURSE
AFTER CENSUS DATE
FAM 818.5 Procedures to Drop a Course After Census Date
1. Obtaining forms.
Between the third and the seventh week of the term, students should obtain petitions to
drop a course after census date (and a program change form) from the college office of
their major. Prior to receiving the petition(s), students will be made aware of (a) the
need for a "serious and compelling reason" for petitioning and (b) the need to support
that reason with documentary evidence.

432

After the seventh week of the term, students may drop or withdraw only in cases such
as serious accident or illness. They must obtain a Waiver of College Regulations form
from Academic Services.
2. Complete withdrawal.
Student withdrawing from all classes also need to attach their student identification card
and a Withdrawal Clearance Card (available in Admissions and Records) to their
petition(s).
3. Documentary evidence.
Students must acquire the instructor's signature on both the petition and the program
change form and must attach documentation to the petition before the college office will
accept it for further action.
4. Processing the forms.
Between the third and the seventh week of each term, following final action on the petition, the
college office should (a) send the pink copy to the student as a means of notifying him or her of
the college dean's decision; (b) forward the yellow copy to Admissions and Records; (c) keep
the white copy (and documentation) in the college office for at least three years. The campus
is subject to audit by the Audit Staff of the Board of Trustees on the matter of after-census drops
and withdrawals, and the college offices are responsible for maintaining records of transactions
that occur between weeks three and seven of each quarter and records of all petitions that
are disapproved at the college level after the seventh week.
After the seventh week of the term all copies (with documentation) of petitions approved at the
college level should be forwarded to Academic Services for final approval/disapproval.
5. Reasons for dropping.
"Serious and compelling" can never be absolutely defined, but agreed upon
circumstances under which students may be permitted to withdraw from one or more
classes between the third and the seventh week of the term include imprisonment,
illness or accident, and direct conflicts between class and work hours. Acceptable
reasons would also include any documented instance of some kind of administrative
error in the drop process itself (but as a first step, students should check with
Admissions and Records, where the problem may possibly be resolved without
recourse to the petition process).
6. Undeclared majors, interdisciplinary majors and unclassified post baccalaureate
students. These three categories of students should consider Academic Services as

433

their college office. Classified post baccalaureates as well as classified and conditionally
classified graduate students should drop or withdraw between the third and the seventh
week of the term through their college office. After the seventh week all copies of
petitions approved at the college level should be forwarded to Academic Services for
final approval/disapproval.

FAM 818.8
MEETING, DISMISSAL AND CONDUCT OF CLASSES
FAM 818.8 Meeting, Dismissal, and Conduct of Classes
Classes and final exams are held at the time and place officially announced by the College at
the time and place officially announced by the College in the Class Schedule. These may not be
changed without prior approval of the Dean of Academic Planning. Forms for requesting change
in a course schedule are available in the College offices.
Classes meet for the full period of time allotted for that class in the Class Schedule and on each
day in which the course is intended to meet. Faculty who find it necessary to cancel or
temporarily reschedule a class must obtain prior approval of the appropriate College Dean.
Dismissal of classes by an individual faculty member to demonstrate support for a particular
social or political movement is considered a violation of professional ethics and a failure or
refusal to perform normal and reasonable duties. The President, in such cases, is required by
the Chancellor to institute formal disciplinary proceedings. The subject and content of each
course at the College is that which has been reviewed by the Curriculum Committee,
recommended by the Faculty Senate, and approved by the College President. Significant
alteration or deviation from the intent and published description of a course requires prior review
and approval, through regular College procedures established for that purpose.
Administrative Code Sec. 42753
Chancellor's Executive Order No. 79
Last Revision: Admin

FAM 818.9
CLASS ATTENDANCE POLICY
FAM 818.9 Class Attendance Policy

Purpose and Scope

434

It is generally assumed that students are expected to attend all in-person class sessions and
activities, and participate in synchronous online activities at the time at which they are
scheduled. However, it may happen that a student has conflicting commitments that preclude
such attendance in isolated instances, and this policy lays out the procedure to request approval
to miss class, and the obligation for the student to complete make-up work. We note that some
accrediting agencies require specific attendance hours and/or procedures, and where those
conflict with this policy, the accrediting body requirements supercede this policy.
Policy Statement
Commitments that will automatically be approved, after appropriate procedure is followed, for
missing a class are:
1. Illness, injury to the student, or medical conditions that preclude attendance
2. Death, injury, or serious illness of an immediate family member. An immediate family
member is defined as a close relative, or a person residing in the immediate household
of the student.
3. Religious observance (for tests and examinations as per California Education Code
section §89320 and extended also to other course activities as described above)
4. University-sanctioned or -approved one-time activities (examples include but are not
limited to artistic performances, participation in scholarly conferences and presentations,
intercollegiate athletic activities (based on the appendix Additional Procedures for
Student Athlete Missed Class Time below), student government, required class field
trips, etc.)
5. Jury duty, military service, or other mandated government obligation
Students may also request to miss class for other reasons, in which case approval is at
the discretion of
the instructor.
Procedure and Process
Procedure regarding missing a class:
As soon as the student is reasonably expected to be aware of the need to miss a class, he
or she must submit a written request to the instructor, along with documentation ifrequired by
the instructor. Requests may be rejected if they are untimely. However, late requests for missing
a test or examination because the timing conflicts with a student's religious creed will be granted
if rescheduling of the test or examination does not create an undue hardship (significant
difficulty or expense) for the University.

435

2. The instructor will notify the student of one of the following, typically within two days:
a. Approval or disapproval to miss class
b. The required work to make up the class, if any, along with a deadline for
submission.
3. The student will complete the required work by the deadline determined by the instructor.
As long as appropriate prior notice is given and students successfully complete the missed
work, faculty shall not penalize a student for missing a class or examination for that activity.
We note that missing more than one or two classes in a term is likely to be detrimental to
studies, and encourage students to consider making other arrangements if they expect to
request to be absent from a significant number of classes.
Approved by the Faculty Senate on
Approved by the Provost on
Approved by the President on ______ _
History
First created: 2016 by Educational Policy and Resources Committee
Revised: April 2019 by Educational Policy and Resources Committee
Renumbered: ____ [Date] from ___ to ___ _

APPENDIX I:
Addendum to Class Attendance Policy
Additional Procedures for Student Athlete Missed Class Time
1. Student athletes shall not miss any regularly scheduled classes for any practice activities.
2. For home competition student athletes shall not miss any classes prior to two hours
before the scheduled competition time.
3. For away competition with same day travel, student athletes shall not miss any classes
prior to 30 minutes before the scheduled time of departure.
4. For away competition with overnight travel, no team shall depart more than 30 hours
prior to the time of competition.
5. The Director of Athletics will provide to the Faculty Athletics Representative and the
Academic Vice President, at least one month prior to the start of a sport's season, a listing
of all competitions in that sport which will necessitate student- athletes being absent from
class. This listing will include the time and date of competition, destination, departure
time, travel time, and return time. The Faculty Athletics Representative or the Academic
Vice President may request that modifications to the travel plans be made.
6. A summary of the listings described in item 5 will be circulated to Faculty.
7. Student athletes will continue to present individual, written notifications, provided by the

436

Athletics Department, to their instructors at least 48 hours prior to each contest which
affects their class attendance.
8. It is expected that student athletes will be responsible for submitting all assignments on
time and that advance arrangements will be initiated by the student-athlete for any tests
that will be missed.
9. It is expected that faculty members will not penalize student athletes for missing classes
due to conflicts with contractually scheduled athletic contests and related travel.
10. It is expected that coaches will not penalize student athletes for missing practices due to
conflicts with regularly scheduled classes for which student- athletes are enrolled.
11. No competition will be scheduled on any day on which final examinations are scheduled
unless prior approval has been received from the Academic Vice President.
12. Exceptions to the above statements for special tournaments and competitions including
championship play must be approved by the Faculty Athletics Representative and the
Academic Vice President.
13. Faculty who have questions about the application of these statements may contact the
Faculty Athletics Representative or the Academic Affairs Committee.
FOR OFFICE USE ONLY
Approved by the CSUSB Faculty Senate on 5/28/19
Signed
Karen Kolehmainen (Senate Chair) 5/28/19
Tomas Morales (CSUSB President) 7/30/19
FSD: 18:89
[This is the last page of an FAM document and shall be kept in the senate office. The dates on
this page must match dates on the corresponding lines of the previous page.]

FAM 440/819.5
OFF-CAMPUS COURSES OFFERED AS A PART OF THE REGULAR COLLEGE
PROGRAM
FAM 819.5Off Campus Courses Offered as a Part of the Regular College Program
AA 77-16, Office of the Chancellor, California State University and Colleges authorizes
Academic departments/schools or colleges to request approval to offer portions of their regular
degree and/or credential programs at off-campus locations. The policy contained herein
establishes for California State College, San Bernardino (1) the conditions under which requests
for campus approval may be made; (2) the criteria which must be met before campus approval

437

can be considered or given; and (3) the procedures which must be followed in seeking campus
approval.
I. The following conditions must be met for each instance in which programs or courses
are proposed for off-campus instruction:
A. Substantial evidence of an educational need.
B. Substantial evidence that the educational need can best be met by using the offcampus instruction.
C. Substantial evidence that the off-campus instruction is in the best interests of the
students to be served, of the College, the departments, colleges, and programs
concerned and the faculty Involved.
II. The following criteria must be met before campus approval of off-campus instruction can be
granted.
A. Approval by appropriate academic constituency.
Off-campus instruction must be approved by the faculty making up the most appropriate
constituency as follows:
1. Departmental/School Degree or Certificate Programs and/or courses.
Department/School approval to offer off-campus instruction must include the
approval of those faculty normally teaching in the degree program, certificate
program, and/or the courses involved and approval of other departments/schools
which provide required support or ancillary courses.
2. Interdisciplinary Degree or Certificate Programs and Courses. Approval to
offer interdisciplinary degree programs, certificate programs and/or courses must
include the approval of the faculty normally teaching in such programs and/or
teaching such courses.
B. Faculty Staffing of Off-Campus Instruction.
Each proposal to offer off-campus instruction must make prior assurance that faculty
staffing requirements can be met for the duration of the specified period such off-campus
instruction will be offered.
C. Faculty Participation.
1. In degree or certificate programs and/or courses contained within a single
department/school, faculty shall be assigned to teach off- campus on the basis of
the following principles listed in order of priority:
a. Voluntary participation.
b. If no volunteers are available, every effort shall be made to hire fully
qualified part-time faculty.

438

c. If neither of the above conditions can be achieved, faculty shall be
required to teach off-campus under the following stipulations:
1) Assignments will be made on a rotating basis among faculty
normally teaching the course(s) to be offered;
2) No faculty member will be required to teach more than one
course off-campus in a single academic year;
3) Only faculty teaching in the TSA involved may be required to
teach off-campus
D. Other Criteria
1. Courses to be scheduled off-campus as part of or offered in support of an
approved on-campus degree or certificate program must be included in the
current catalog and be applicable for degree credit.
2. There must be a level of support comparable to equivalent on-campus activity.
This support must include appropriate arrangements for student access to faculty
for advising and consultation and provision for student services, e.g., career
counseling, as needed. There must be provision for an adequate level of library
and audio-visual material support. These materials shall be provided in such a
way and to the extent that existing on-campus programs continue to be
adequately supported. The College Library staff shall monitor the library
resources involved in off-campus programs to ensure that the intent of this
statement is implemented in consultation with appropriate faculty. The facilities in
which the programs are offered shall be satisfactory for the mode of instruction
employed.
3. Courses taught off-campus as part of a regular program may be subject to
student evaluation as required by Board of Trustee and College policy. Such offcampus courses shall be subject to student evaluations only according to the
guidelines established by the Faculty Senate as contained in the Faculty
Information Handbook, Sec. 2.10, III, D and Section 2.20. The Associate Vice
President for Academic Affairs/Provost will arrange for the administration of
SETE's in courses selected in accordance with the above policy at the
appropriate time.
III. Proposals requesting approval to offer off-campus instruction must adhere to established
College policy regarding curricular proposals.
IV. Adjustments in the teaching, committee and office hour schedules for faculty teaching at offcampus locations will be made when required. Travel expenses, where appropriate, shall be
provided by the College.
V. Approved proposals shall be forwarded to the Office of the Chancellor, CSUC, for approval
as required.

439

FAM 820.1 GUIDELINES FOR PREPARATION OF CLASS SCHEDULES
FAM 820.1 Guidelines for Preparation of Class Schedules

SCHEDULING OF CLASSES
Department chairs/School directors, college schedule coordinators, and college deans are the
individuals who bear primary responsibility for developing class schedules. This task should be
performed in consultation with individual faculty members, whose concurrence is sought but not
to the exclusion of any of the following guidelines:
1. A sufficient variety of classes must be scheduled, and at appropriate times, to meet
students' degree and program requirements. Consultation with other colleges,
departments, and program coordinators should occur to the extent necessary to achieve
this objective.
2. In order to maximize utilization of university facilities, each department/school
whenever possible will schedule its course sections according to the standard meeting
times e.g. (See Attachment I, Scheduling Times).
No. of
unit
classes

Offered
days

Time per
meeting(minutes)

4

MWF

70, 70, 60

4

MW or TTH

*110

3

MWF

50

3

MW

*85

3

TTH

* 85

2

MW or TTH

50

2

M, T, W or
TH

*110

* Provides for 10 minute break.
3. Classes should be scheduled to make most effective use of resources.
Example 1: A class should not be scheduled if under similar circumstances the class
has been cancelled for low enrollment in previous
terms.
440

Example 2: A class should not be scheduled in an intermediate-size
lecture room if its potential for attracting students is very limited
4. After the schedule is submitted to Academic Programs all schedule adjustments should be
fully justified.
5. Departments are encouraged to use the non-traditional course scheduling pattern (Earlybird)
0700-0750 on four mornings and weekend time blocks, at their option.
6. The need for slight adjustments in a few instances e.g., physical education activity courses,
laboratory and activity courses is recognized. As well, there may be a few specific instances in
which individual courses cannot be accommodated within the Standard Times (See Attachment
I, Standard Times). In these cases, colleges must secure approval for deviation from the
scheduling format from the Associate Vice President of Academic Programs.
____________________________________________________________________________
Attachment I
STANDARD TIMES
4 Unit Classes
MWF
(70 minutes)

4 Unit Classes
MW/TTh
(110 minutes)

4 Unit Classes
M, T, W, Th, F
(230 minutes)

4 Unit
Classes
SATURDAY
(230 minutes)

MWF 08000910
MWF 0920-1030
MWF 1040-1150
MWF 1200-1310
MWF 1320-1430
MWF 1440-1550

MW 1600-1750
MW 1800-1950
MW 2000-2150
TTH 08000950
TTH 1000-1150
TTH 1200-1350
TTH 1400-1550
TTH 1600-1750
TTH 1800-1950
TTH 2000-2150

M 0800-1150
T 0800-1150
W 0800-1150
TH 0800-1150
F 0800-1150
M 1800-2150
T 1800-2150
W 1800-2150
TH 18002150

S 0800-1150
S 0900-1250

441

3 Unit Classes
MWF
(50 minutes)

3 Unit Classes
MW/TTH
(85 minutes)

3 Unit Classes
TTH
(85 minutes)

MWF 0800-0850
MWF 0920-1010
MWF 1040-1130
MWF 1200-1250
MWF 1320-1414
MWF 1440-1530

MW 1600-1725
MW 1800-1925
MW 2000-2125
TTH 0800-0925
TTH 1000-1125
TTH 1200-1325

TTH 1400-1525
TTH 1600-1725
TTH 1800-1925
TTH 2000-2125

2 Unit Classes
MW/TTH
(50 minutes)

2 Unit Classes
M, T, W, TH
(110 minutes)

2 Unit Classes
SATURDAY
(110 minutes)

MW 1600-1650
MW 1700-1750
MW 1800-1850
MW 1900-1950
MW 2000-2050
MW 2100-2150
TTH 0800-0850
TTH 0900-0950
TTH 1000-1050
TTH 1100-1150
TTH 1200-1250
TTH 1300-1350
TTH 1400-1450
TTH 1500-1550
TTH 1600-1650
TTH 1700-1750
TTH 1800-1850
TTH 1900-1950
TTH 2000-2050
TTH 2100-2150

M 1600-1725
M 1800-1950
M 2000-2150
T 0800-0950
T 1000-1150
T 1200-1350
T 1400-1550
T 1600-1750
T 1800-1950
T 2000-2150
W 1600-1750
W 1800-1950
W 2000-2150
TH 0800-0950
TH 1000-1150
TH 1200-1350
TH 1400-1550
TH 1600-1750
TH 1800-1950
TH 2000-2150

S 0900-1050
S 1100-1250

FAM 820.5
POLICY ON THE ADMINISTRATION, PROCESSING, AND USE OF
STUDENT OPINIONS OF TEACHING EFFECTIVENESS (SOTE)
FAM 820.5 Student Opinions of Teaching Effectiveness (SOTE)

442

1. Purpose. The Student Opinions of Teaching Effectiveness (SOTE) process is designed as
one of several sources of information to be used in performance review and periodic evaluation
of faculty teaching. In addition, faculty should find SOTE information helpful in pursuing the
normal professional goal of maintaining and improving instructional effectiveness.
2. Forms to be Used. There are three forms that could be used: A) SOTE Evaluation, B) SOTE
Faculty Comment, and C) SOTE Teaching Improvement. Hereby referred to as Form A, B and
C, respectively. Form A is required to be used in all classes being evaluated, and it shall contain
the questions shown in Attachment #1. Forms B and C are optional; that is, the faculty member
whose class is being evaluated will determine whether or not they are to be included in the
SOTE process. Form B is available for use by faculty to describe significant circumstances that
could potentially affect student course evaluations. Form C includes supplemental questions to
help a faculty member improve his or her teaching.
3. Classes to be Evaluated. Written or electronic student evaluation shall be required for all
classes that faculty teach, with the following exceptions:
i. Classes with enrollments of fewer than five students;
ii. Field experiences, thesis research, distance learning through
interactive televised video, independent project/study, recitations,
and internships; and
iii. Team-taught classes.
Faculty members teaching classes in which SOTEs are not administered are encouraged to use
alternative evaluation instruments.
No first quarter SOTE of a probationary faculty member shall be placed in his or her WPAF
unless he or she requests that it be included.
4. Administration of SOTEs.
4.1. SOTE Forms A, B, and C for distribution to either students or faculty shall be
contained in an envelope on the outside of which is attached written instructions
as shown in Attachment #2. These instructions shall provide information for the faculty
member, the student distributing the SOTE Forms A and C, and the students filling out
the forms.
4.2 During the 7th week of classes, colleges/departments/schools shall prepare and
distribute SOTE packages to the faculty members. Faculty members shall then, at a
convenient time between the eighth and tenth week of classes, select a student in each
class to administer the SOTEs in accordance with the written instructions. For
hybrid/blended courses, SOTEs will be administered if possible in a face to face class
session between the eighth and tenth weeks; if there is no face to face session
scheduled in this period, the SOTE will be administered online. For courses offered

443

under an alternative time format, SOTEs will be administered at an appropriate time
during one of the last two class sessions. The Student will read the appropriate
instructions to the class, distribute the forms, collect the forms, and return the sealed
envelope with the completed forms to the appropriate administrative offices. Under
certain circumstances, such as in the case of large-lecture General Education courses, a
faculty member may request assistance from their college/department/school office in
the administration of SOTEs. Failure on the part of faculty members to carry out
scheduled student evaluations may be grounds for disciplinary action. As
significant responsibility for the completion of SOTEs is placed upon students,
disciplinary action should be taken only when it has been determined that faculty
were derelict in their role in the SOTE process.
4.3 The faculty member teaching the class shall not be present during the administration
of SOTEs. The faculty member shall refrain from discussing SOTEs with students in any
manner that would tend to influence how the students would respond to the SOTE
questions.
4.4 During the time that SOTE Forms are administered, students shall refrain from
discussing with one another the teaching effectiveness of the faculty member being
evaluated. Students shall be told (by the person administering the forms) that such
discussion is inappropriate, should be reported to the Academic Personnel Office, and
may result in invalidation of the SOTE results in the affected class. (See Attachment #2.)
4.5 Reports of any inappropriate behavior in the administration of SOTEs, whether on
the part of faculty or students, shall be referred to the Academic Personnel Office. If,
after consulting with the faculty member and thoroughly investigating all such reports,
the Associate Provost for Academic Personnel determines that such inappropriateness
is indeed likely to have affected the SOTE results, the SOTEs in question shall be
invalidated. All invalidated SOTE’s forms and summary data shall be removed from the
Personnel Action File (PAF). The Associate Provost shall submit a memorandum to the
PAF indicating that the SOTEs have been invalidated, but not specifying the reason. The
faculty member and the appropriate department chair shall be notified of this decision.
Make-up SOTEs should be scheduled at the earliest opportunity to do so. Make-up
SOTEs do not need to be in the same course in which the SOTEs were invalidated.
5. Processing of Completed SOTE Forms.
5.1 Once SOTE forms are collected, the designated person in the
colleges/departments/schools shall forward completed forms to the Academic Personnel
Office for analysis, along with a list of all SOTEs scheduled.
5.2 The summary reports shall contain the statistical data shown in the table below for
each of the questions on the front of the form. The total number of student respondents
shall be printed once on the summary report.

444

TABLE OF STATISTICAL FUNCTIONS
FOR ANALYZING SOTE QUESTIONS, Table 1
Instructor Data
College Data
Q1-3 numerical response frequency
Q1-3 response percentage
Q4-5 numerical response frequency
Q4-5 response percentage
Q4-5 frequency histogram
Q4-5 response histogram (percentage)
Q4-5 mean (12 or more responses)
Q45 mean
NOTE: The instructor and college means shall be reported to one decimal
point.
Q4-5 median
For instructor data, the numerical response frequency is the number of studentsre sponding to a
particular question, and is included for all Form A questions. For questions four and five solely,
additional standard statistical functions to be reported are the trimmed mean, the median, and
the frequency histogram. There shall be no statistical analysis of the questions collectively;
there shall be no University-wide statistics; nor shall any other statistical data be reported other
than those specified in this subsection (6.2). Attachment #1 is a sample summary
report.
5.3 Whenever summary reports are ready, these shall be forwarded to Academic
Personnel for distribution to faculty members whose classes were SOTE’d and to
appropriate college deans and department chairs/school directors. The completed forms
shall then be filed in respective faculty PAFs attached to a copy of the summary report.
5.4 On request, faculty members may review the completed forms in appropriate
administrative office, once the forms have been filed.
5.5 Statistical summaries shall be prepared for each faculty member for each class
SOTE’d after each quarter. These statistical summaries shall consist only of those
statistics that are listed in Table 1. There shall be no new data that has not been
distributed to the faculty member. In addition, for each SOTE administration, the
summary shall include the number of respondents; the department/school, number and
section of the class; and the time of day of the
class.
6. Use of SOTEs (Completed Forms, Summary Reports, Cumulative Statistical
Summaries, and Faculty to College Comparison).
6. 1 Completed SOTE forms A and B, along with summary reports and cumulative
statistical summaries, shall become part of the Working Personnel Action File of faculty
members for the purpose of performance review and periodic evaluation and shall be

445

considered in accordance with the guidelines of the Procedures and Criteria for
Performance Review and Periodic Evaluation. Attachment #4 contains guidance on the
interpretation of SOTE statistical
summaries.
6.2 The faculty member shall have sole discretion to include Form C questions and
some or all of the student responses in his/her Faculty Activity Report attachment.
6.3 At the beginning of each academic year, for each College, College summary
statistics and histograms are to be produced based on the cumulative SOTE
results from the previous year. College summary statistics will be stratified by
lower division, upper division, and graduate courses.
6.4 College statistical summaries will serve for evaluators producing teaching
evaluations during the retention, promotion, and tenure faculty evaluation
process as the basis of comparison between a faculty member and a college. A
faculty member can choose to make other comparisons depending on the
availability of appropriate data. (For first year of the SOTE process
implementation, the previous year's SETE statistics will serve as the basis of
comparison, following the summary statistical guidelines described above as
closely as possible.)
6.5 College statistical summaries will serve for evaluators producing teaching
evaluations during the retention, promotion, and tenure faculty evaluation
process as the basis of comparison between a faculty member and a college. A
faculty member can choose to make other comparisons depending on the
availability of appropriate data.
7. Monitoring and Revision of the SOTE process and forms. The Faculty Affairs
Committee is responsible for drafting or reviewing recommendations for changing the
SOTE process and/or forms and this policy, and for forwarding these recommendations
to the Faculty Senate unless otherwise specified by the Faculty Senate.
FSD 87-25.R7
Approved by the Faculty Senate
Karen Kolehmainen, Chair Date: 9/26/17
Reviewed by the Academic Affairs Council
Shari McMahan, Provost and Date: 9/27/17
Vice President for Academic Affairs
Approved by the President
Tomás Morales Date: 10/06/17

446

Attachment 1
SOTE FORMS
Form A
CALIFORNIA STATE UNIVERSITY, SAN BERNARDINO
Student Opinion of Teaching Effectiveness
5500 University Parkway, San Bernardino, CA 92407-2397
Name of faculty being rated

Class Description

Call Number

1. Rate your interest in the subject matter of this course before you took the class.
Very High High Moderately High Moderately Low Low Very Low
2. How many class sessions did you attend?
All Almost all More than half Less than half
3. Why did you take this course? Choose all that apply.
The course fulfills a general education requirement.
The course fulfills a requirement in my major.
The course will improve job/career opportunities.
I have enjoyed the professor's class(es) in the past.
The class sounded interesting to me.
Other: (Please specify)

447

4. How would you rate the overall quality of instruction in this course?
Excellent Very Good Good Fair Poor Unsatisfactory
Please provide reasons why you gave the above rating.

5. How would you rate your professor’s specific contributions to your learning in this
course?
Excellent Very Good Good Fair Poor Unsatisfactory
Please provide reasons why you gave the above rating.

CALIFORNIA STATE UNIVERSITY, SAN BERNARDINO
Faculty Supplemental Comment Form
5500 University Parkway, San Bernardino, CA 92407-2397
Class Description

448

Call Number

Filling out this form is optional. This form should only be completed in the event of an
unusual circumstance(s) that you believe may influence the Student Opinion of Teaching
Effectiveness (SOTE) responses in this class. The faculty member must submit the
completed form to Academic Personnel no later than the last scheduled class session of
the quarter being SOTE’d. No forms will be accepted after that date.
To Faculty: Using the space below, please describe the unusual circumstance(s)
that you believe may influence the SOTE responses in this class.

CALIFORNIA STATE UNIVERSITY, SAN BERNARDINO
Teaching Improvement Supplemental Questions
5500 University Parkway, San Bernardino, CA 92407-2397
Name of faculty being rated
Class Description
Call Number
INSTRUCTIONS: Teaching Improvement Supplemental questions are designed to help faculty
improve their teaching. Up to five (5) questions can be included for student response. These are
to be open-ended questions. Questions will be drawn from an existing bank of questions
maintained by the Teaching Resource Center, or submitted by faculty for inclusion as

449

supplemental questions. Faculty must have an original question approved by the Instructional
Quality Committee before using it.
Questions and responses will not be included in Faculty RPT file. If the faculty member desires,
the faculty member may choose to include the questions and some or all of the student
response material in his/her FAR attachment.
Q1.
Q2.
Q3.
Q4.
Q5.
Illustrative Faculty Statistical Summary
Student Opinion of Teaching Effectiveness (SOTE)
Instructor Name: Smith, J
Course Description: Selected Topics in Geography
Course + Section: GEOG 390 01
Call Number: 12345
Year and Term: 2005 Spring
Enrollment: 36
1. Rate your interest in the subject matter of course before you took the class.
N
_______________________
Very High 8
High 10
Moderately High 6
Moderately Low 5
Low 2
Very Low 1
________________________
Total 32
2. How many class sessions did you attend?
N
_______________________
All 12

450

Almost All 15
More than Half 3
Less than Half 2
FSD: 87-25.R7
FAM 820.5
Previous FAM 320
Last Revision 2017: FAC
12
________________________
Total 32
3. Why did you take this course? Choose all that apply.
N
_________________________________________________________
The course fulfills a general education requirement. 26
The course fulfills a requirement in my major. 19
The course will improve job/career opportunities. 17
I have enjoyed the professor's class(es) in the past. 10
The class sounded interesting to me. 26
Other: (Please specify) 3
________________________________________________________________
4. How would you rate the overall quality of instruction in this course?
N = 30 Mean= 5.1 Median = 5.0
5. How would you rate the instructor's contributions to your learning in this
course?
N = 32 Mean= 5.2 Median = 5.0

Illustrative College Comparison Summary
Student Opinion of Teaching Effectiveness (SOTE)
Comparison Group:
Social & Behavioral Science
Additional possible comparison groups:
• General Education Courses
1. Rate your interest in the subject
matter of this
2. How many class sessions did you

451

attend?
course before you took the class.
Percentage Lower Upper Grad Total Percentage Lower Upper Grad Total
very high 20 25 17 22 all 35 38 33 36
high 25 31 33 30 almost all 50 47 50 48
moderately
high
20 19 23 20 more
than half
10 9 13 11
moderately
low
20 16 17 17 less than
half
5635
low 5 6 7 6 Total 100 100 100 100
very low 10 3 3 5
Total 100 100 100 100
Percentage
3. Why did you take this course?
Choose all that apply.
Lower Upper Grad Total
The course fulfills a general education
requirement
50 30 0 28
The course fulfills a requirement in my
major
19 40 80 45
The course will improve job/career
opportunities

452

19 20 75 34
I have enjoyed the professor's class(es)
in the past
13 20 25 20
The class sounded interesting to me 20 5 20 13
Other 3 10 5 7
4. How would you rate the overall quality of instruction in this course?

Mean 4.8 5.0 5.1 5.0
5. How would you rate the instructor's contributions to your learning in this
course?
Mean 4.8 4.9 4.7 4.8
Attachment 2
INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE ADMINISTRATION OF SOTE'S
TO THE FACULTY MEMBER:
I. Forms A and C (C is optional):
1. Since SOTE’s are an important element in the evaluation of faculty, it is essential
that these be administered between the eighth and tenth week of classes in order
that they may be processed and included in your Faculty Personnel File. Failure
on the part of faculty members to carry out scheduled SOTE’s can be
grounds for disciplinary action.

453

2. If you perceive special circumstances with your classes, such as in the case of large
lecture courses, you should contact your department office to request assistance in
administering the SOTE. This request should be made in a timely manner.
3. Otherwise, at a convenient time during the weeks of (______________________),
select a "mature and responsible" student to distribute SOTE forms, read aloud the
following statement to the class,
“YOUR CLASS WAS SELECTED TO DO THE STUDENT OPINION OF TEACHING
EFFECTIVENESS. THE STUDENT OPINION OF TEACHING EFFECTIVENESS IS
AN IMPORTANT ELEMENT IN THE EVALUATION OF FACULTY, AND YOUR
WRITTEN COMMENTS ARE PARTICULARLY VALUABLE, SO PLEASE WRITE
THOROUGHLY, THOUGHTFULLY AND CLEARLY.”
Then give the complete SOTE packet to the student AND LEAVE THE CLASSROOM.
4. Aside from arranging for the student to distribute the SOTE forms, you shall refrain
from any discussion of the SOTE process during the class session.
FSD: 87-25.R7
FAM 820.5
Previous FAM 320
Last Revision 2017: FAC
17
STUDENT INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE ADMINISTRATION OF SOTE’s
TO THE STUDENT DISTRIBUTING SOTE FORMS
1. Clearly print your name: _______________________
2. Distribute SOTE forms and pencils.
3. Announce that pens with black or blue ink are preferred to pencils. If pencils are
used, please ask the students to press firmly to make the writing as dark as possible.
4. Read aloud to the class the following statement:
“UNIVERSITY FACULTY EVALUATION COMMITTEES CAREFULLY CONSIDER
YOUR RESPONSES WHEN MAKING RECOMMENDATIONS ON THE
REAPPOINTMENT, RETENTION, PROMOTION, AND TENURE OF FACULTY.
YOUR RESPONSES ARE CONFIDENTIAL AND WILL NOT BE MADE AVAILABLE TO
YOUR INSTRUCTOR UNTIL AFTER GRADES ARE RECORDED. DISCUSSION OF

454

THE INSTRUCTOR WHILE COMPLETING THE SOTE FORMS IS INAPPROPRIATE,
WILL BE REPORTED TO THE APPROPRIATE ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICE, AND MAY
RESULT IN THE INVALIDATION OF ALL SOTE FORMS FOR THE CLASS."
4. After students are finished, collect the SOTE forms and place them in the envelope.
SEAL THE ENVELOPE IN THE PRESENCE OF THE CLASS.
5. Promptly return the sealed envelope to one of the following locations:
Department Office ______ (if before 4:30 p.m.)
College Office ______ (if before 5:00 p.m.)
Biology Building (BI 132) SOTE Drop Box
Faculty Office Building (Stairwell area between the Colleges of Education and Social
and Behavioral Sciences) SOTE Drop Box
Jack Brown Hall (2nd Floor Lobby) SOTE Drop Box
University Hall (U-Hall 124) SOTE Drop Box
Library Bldg (end of bldg towards the mountains) SOTE Drop Box
6. Unless totally unavoidable, DO NOT TAKE THE ENVELOPE OFF CAMPUS.
7. If your class meets at an off-campus location be sure to use the postage-paid
envelope that is included with your package. PLEASE MAIL THE SAME DAY IF
POSSIBLE. In case of off-campus evening classes, make sure to mail the envelope in
the morning of the following day.
8. Write a report of any discussion of the instructor's teaching effectiveness during
SOTE administration using the back of this instruction sheet and turn it in with the SOTE
packet.
SOTE FORMS WITH STUDENT COMMENTS FOR PROBATIONARY FACULTY,
TENURED FACULTY AT THE RANK OF ASSISTANT/ASSOCIATE, AND
FULL-TIME LECTURERS ARE AVAILABLE FOR REVIEW IN THE ACADEMIC
PERSONNEL OFFICE, AD- 102.
SOTE FORMS WITH STUDENT COMMENTS FOR TENURED FACULTY AT THE
RANK OF PROFESSOR AND FOR PART-TIME LECTURERS ARE AVAILABLE FOR
REVIEW IN THE SCHOOL OFFICES/DEPARTMENT OFFICES.
NOTE: WHEN THERE ARE TWELVE (12) OR FEWER RESPONSES FOR
QUESTIONS 4 and 5, ONLY THE INSTRUCTOR HISTOGRAM, RESPONSE
NUMBER, AND MEDIAN WILL BE REPORTED.Attachment 4
GUIDANCE ON THE INTERPRETATION OF SOTE STATISTICAL SUMMARIES
The Old SETE Statistical Summary

455

The old SETE statistical summary included item frequency distribution, instructor
means, and instructor medians. In addition, the school mean and standard deviation are
included.
The New SOTE Statistical Summary
The new SOTE statistical summary includes the following for Form A:
For instructors:
Item frequency distribution, item frequency distribution represented as a histogram for
questions four (4) and five (5), trimmed mean (ten percent trimmed mean), and median.
For the college:
For all questions, frequency distributions are given as relative frequency reported as a
percentage; for questions four (4) and five (5), frequency distributions are presented as
histograms of relative frequency reported as a percentage, with means also included. In
addition, the numerical and graphic representations of college results will be broken
down by lower, upper, and graduate level courses. Results are reported both
numerically and graphically (histogram). The college level measure is used for
comparison with faculty in the college.
A brief explanation of each of the statistics to be used is given below.
Frequency Distribution
A frequency distribution is the collective listing of the frequency (count) for each
particular item/question.
Frequency Histogram
It is a bar graph of the frequency distribution. It shows as a bar the frequency with which
each response occurs, typically as a count or a relative frequency. The bars,
collectively, give a graphical representation of all the responses, which is defined as the
frequency distribution of the data.
Instructor Mean and Instructor Median
The mean and median are two methods that are commonly used to measure central
tendency; that is, they are measures that represent the location of the center of the
distribution. The mean, sometimes called the "average," is found by adding up all the
scores for a particular item and dividing by the number of responses.
The median is sometimes called the “50 percentile”. Half of the scores are larger than
the median, and, half of the scores are smaller than the median. The is defined by
position, not necessarily a score, therefore it is possible to have a fractional value for
the median although the scores are all whole numbers.
The mean is a good estimate of the average when the scores are normally distributed.
The median is preferred over the mean when the distribution of scores is significantly
skewed or the dataset is small, because the median, unlike the mean, is unaffected by
extreme scores that commonly occur in small datasets and non-normal distributions.
Differences in SOTE means should be interpreted cautiously. In data that are collected

456

in groups (ie. courses), most of the variability in means is due to characteristics of the
students and not due to characteristics of the course and instructor.
Relative Frequency As Percentage
The relative frequency is the proportion that each response category makes up of the
total responses for a particular item/question. For example, if 125 people responded to
a particular question that had three response options, excellent, good, and fair, with 50
respondents selecting excellent, 60 selecting good, and 15 selecting fair, the relative
frequencies would be 0.40, 0.48, and 0.12, respectively. To turn these fractions into a
percent, multiply each by 100. The result is the relative frequency reported as a
percentage.
College Mean
The college mean is the average score for the entire college. The measure is used for
comparison purposes. It is used to determine the relative position of the instructor in
relation to the average score of his or her peers in the same college.

FAM 820.9
COURSE SYLLABUS POLICY AND GUIDELINES
FAM 820.9 Course Syllabus Policy and Guidelines
Purpose and Scope
The purpose of this document is to articulate, based on university policies and California state
law, what minimum information must be included on course syllabi and what information is
recommended for inclusion. Such information provides students with basic course objectives
and faculty expectations, and also serves to clarify course policy in the case of grade
grievances or other student, faculty, or program concerns.
Policy Statement
1. General guidelines
A. Unless circumstances dictate otherwise, instructor(s) shall provide course syllabi on
or before the second class meeting.
B. Instructor(s) shall provide students with course syllabi in paper copy and/or in a
Leaming Management System and/or via e-mail at the start of each term as described in
part (a). If the syllabus is only distributed electronically, instructor(s) shall provide
instructions for document access.
C. In distributed learning courses, enrolled students shall be provided with the course
URL, access instructions, and the syllabus itself, via e-mail.
D. If any information given on the syllabus is subject to change (e.g., topics of
discussion, readings, due dates, examination dates), such information shall be noted on
the syllabus as "tentative" or "subject to change."

457

E. Instructor(s) shall submit electronic or hard copies of the syllabus for each course to
the department office, which will keep a copy of each syllabus for at least five years;
F. Instructors shall ensure that their syllabi are created with accessibility best practices.
Information and templates can be found on the Accessible Technology website.
2. At a minimum, each course syllabus must contain:
A. Course name, number, and catalog description;
B. Name(s) of the instructor(s), office location, telephone number and/or e- mail address,
and office hours;
C. Class term, meeting times, location;
D. Course goals and/or objectives, and expected student learning outcomes;
E. Required text(s) and/or materials;
F. Types and descriptions of major assignments;
G. Basis for assigning course grade;
H. A current statement of ADA compliance and entitlement to accommodation, as
provided by the appropriate University office, in particular including contact
information for the university's office for Services to Students with Disabilities, and
the reminder that it is the student's responsibility to seek academic accommodations
for a verified disability in a timely manner;
I. A statement of commitment to the values of inclusion, diversity, and equity.
Examples of such statements are available here;
J. Instructions referring students to the "Academic Regulations and Procedures" in the
CSUSB Bulletin of Courses for the university's policies on course withdrawal,
cheating, and plagiarism.
K. Instructions referring students to the Office of Emergency Management and Business
Continuitv for information regarding emergency management and safety guidelines.
3. Instructors are strongly encouraged to include the following additional information on
their syllabi, as applicable:
A. Prerequisite courses and/or prior knowledge and/or additional skills required of the
student;
B. Policies on participation and attendance, especially as those items affect final grades;
C. Provision( s) for makeup of missed or late assignments, if any;
D. Other information essential to the course, e.g., information about accessing any
online
resources, or assignments (such as field trips or service-learning activities) that must
be accomplished at off-campus locations;
E. Consequences for cheating and/or plagiarism;
F. Individual department/school or program guidelines, if applicable.
4. Faculty offering web-based or other distributed learning courses must also include:
A. The statement, per the CSU San Bernardino Distributed Leaming Policy (FSD 010 l .R2, available at http://senate.csusb.edu/docs/Policies/(FSD%20010 l.R2)%20DL %20Policy.pdf, if faculty have chosen to use non-university supported
course resources, that "the university will not provide technical support for those
resources that the university does not endorse any products which may be advertised
through those resources";

458

B. Information regarding minimum computer hardware and software requirements for
the class as well as what campus facilities are available to support these requirements
for students who cannot afford to buy the technology; and
C. Alternate procedures for submitting work in the event of technical breakdowns.

FAM 820.35
POLICY ON THE PRESERVATION OF SMALL CLASSES
FAM 820.35 Policy on the Preservation of Small Classes
California State University, San Bernardino is dedicated to providing quality education to
students as its premier objective. A crucial aspect of this commitment is to ensure that a
significant portion of instruction is conducted in small class sections, balanced by
instruction in intermediate and large class sections. This has been part of the heritage of
the University from its inception and it shall continue to be a fundamental objective of
the institution. The goal of the University is to offer all of its students the opportunity to
take the majority of their classes in small class sections.
JUSTIFICATION:
The faculty and administration at the California State University, San Bernardino are
firmly committed to the concept of providing a preponderance of instruction in smallclass format counterbalanced by a limited number of intermediate and large classes.
Effectively maintaining the appropriate balance between small and intermediate/large
classes is dependent upon a University commitment to careful planning and careful
monitoring of scheduling practices. The above policy is the critical first step in facilitating
faculty and administrative cooperation toward sustaining this wonderful University
tradition.

FAM 820.55
STUDENT OPINION OF DEGREE-APPLICABLE COURSES OFFERED THROUGH THE
COLLEGE OF EXTENDED AND GLOBAL EDUCATION
FAM 820.55 Student Opinion of Degree-Applicable Courses Offered Through CEGE
Purpose and Scope
The purpose of this document is to regulate student evaluation of teaching in courses offered
through the College of Extended and Global Education (CEGE). The intent is to provide

459

students in these courses an equal opportunity to provide feedback as students in regular
Academic Year state-supported courses.
Policy Statement
This policy governs feedback provided from students to faculty. The primary purpose of this
feedback is for formative assessment to the faculty member only. The faculty member may
request that the evaluations be included in his or her Working Personnel Action File (WPAF),
but otherwise they will not be included there.
Procedure and Process
All degree-applicable courses offered through CEGE shall be evaluated by students following
procedures similar to those used for state-supported courses, including the use of the student
questionnaires used in state-supported courses. All raw data, along with a copy of the statistical
summaries, will be stored electronically in a secure document management system in a location
to which only the faculty member has access, and the instructor will be notified of their
availability immediately after grades are processed. Responsibility for administration of these
SOTEs lies with the same office(s) that are responsible for administration ofregular Academic
Year state-supported courses.
History
First Created: ____________ (Date) by __________ _
Revised: March 14, 2019 by EPRC
Renumbered: Date? f

FAM 822.5
CURRICULUM GUIDELINES
FAM 822.5 Curriculum Guidelines.pdf
I. New Programs, Changes in Programs
1. Academic Master Plan.
New degree proposals must be in harmony with the University's Academic Master Plan. Each
year, the University submits a five-year Academic Master Plan to the Chancellor's staff, the
Board of trustees, and the California Postsecondary Education Commission. Requests to add
degree programs to the Plan should be made to the appropriate college dean and the Associate
Vice President, Academic Programs.
2. Format
460

.
The format of the new degree proposal should correspond to that outlined on the special
Program Planning Form(s) available from the Scheduling Office. In addition, groups developing
new programs should be aware of the Procedures for Submitting Degree Proposals (The
California State University, Office of the Chancellor, Division of Educational Programs and
Resources, Revised April 1985). Much of the information required by the Procedures can be
used for on-campus review as well.
3. Need for the Program; Students Served.
The kinds of students for whom the program is designed and any special requirements for
admission to the program should be noted. A needs assessment is also required. Generally this
minimally involves a survey of potential students, endorsements by appropriate community
officials and an indication of job market and societal demand for graduates.
4. Facilities, Equipment and Staffing.
Approval of a degree program by the Chancellor's Office is subject to assurances that financial
support, qualified faculty, physical facilities and library holdings sufficient to establish and
maintain the program will be available. Similar assurances should be provided for on-campus
approval. This should take the form of specific statements addressed to faculty needs, staffing
arrangements, physical facilities, capital equipment, operating expenses, library holdings, and
special requirements for internship, clinical or other off-campus facilities. For programs of a
complex nature, supporting statements from the Associate Vice President, Academic
Resources, the University Librarian or other appropriate administrators are advisable.

5. Consultation.
Upon submission of a new degree proposal, evidence should be provided that consultations
have occurred among appropriate segments of the University.
6. Size of the Major; B.A./B.S. Options.
Certain minimum requirements for degree programs are specified in Title 5 of the California
Administrative Code. Although there is no specification of a maximum requirement, this should
not ordinarily exceed 12 courses (60 units) for the B.A. The principal exception to this upper limit
is anticipated in interdisciplinary majors where a greater than usual proportion of the course
work may need to be at an introductory level. In any case, the new degree proposal should
address itself squarely to the question of the size of the major program.
In certain disciplines where undergraduate preparation is of a professional type, it is appropriate
to consider a B.S. degree or B.S./B.S. options. In general, the B.S. degree tends to be more
structured and the B.A. degree more flexible. Also, the B.S. degree may require additional units

461

for graduation. Regardless of size, structure of curriculum, or number of options, all students in
a given major must have at least 5 undergraduate courses.
Title V Requirements
Common Core
B.A.: 186 units; 60 units (minimum) at upper-division; 36 units (minimum) in the major;
18 units (minimum) upper-division in the major.
B.S.: 186 (minimum) to 198 units (maximum); 60 units (minimum) at upper-division; 54
units (minimum) in the major; 27 units (minimum) upper-division in the major.
M.A./M.S.: 45 unit minimum.
7. General Education.
Although courses taken to satisfy General Education requirements are not ordinarily appropriate
to the needs of a major program, there are instances in which certain courses may serve this
dual purpose. If General Education courses are specified as part of a major, the major program
must still provide for at least 36 units outside of General Education for the B.A. and 54 units for
the B.S. The new degree proposal should explain the relationship, if any, of course work in
General Education to that in the major.
8. Prerequisites.
Many degree programs require prerequisites outside of the discipline itself. If a given course or
series of courses is to be specified as a "prerequisite" to the degree program, justification must
be provided regarding:
(a) why the proposed prerequisite is necessary,
(b) how the prerequisite relates to required or elective courses in the degree program,
(c) at what point in the undergraduate program the prerequisite to be completed, and
(d) what mechanism will be employed to insure this completion?
9. Free Electives.
Although the number of "free" electives will be variable from one degree program to another,
typically this number should be six or more. Degree proposals which permit substantially fewer
free electives should include a specific justification of this fact.
10. Options, Concentrations, Special Emphasis and Minors.

462

An option, a concentration and a special emphasis are all defined as an aggregate of courses
designed to give a student specialized knowledge, competence or skill usually with a degree
major. All majors must have common core of 5 undergraduate or 3 graduate courses. A minor is
a formal aggregate of courses in a designated subject area distinct from and outside the
student's degree major. The information required for implementing an option, concentration,
special emphasis or minor is less detailed than for a full degree program, both at the campus
level and in the Chancellor's Office. All of the preceding guidelines that are appropriate to the
submission of an option, concentration, special emphasis, or minor should be followed. In
addition, the proposal should demonstrate specifically that the aggregate of courses had the
type of coherence that will lead to the acquisition of "specialized knowledge, competence or
skill." As a minimum, options within an undergraduate degree program must share five
courses in a common core, and options within a graduate degree program, three.
11. Changes in Programs.
Ordinarily, changes in existing program do not need to be justified in as much detail as new
programs. Those of the preceding guidelines which are applicable to the proposed change
should be followed.
II. New Course, Course Changes
1. Format.
The format for course proposals should correspond to that outlined in the special Course
Planning Forms available from the Scheduling Office.
2. Course Number, Title and Description.
The course proposal indicates, through the course number, whether the course is degree
applicable and whether it is to be lower-division, upper-division or graduate level. In some cases
it may be necessary to justify why the indicated course level is most appropriate. Both the
course title and course description should be as clear and concise as possible. Also,
consideration should be given to potential articulation problems with community colleges when
considering an appropriate course level and content.
3. Need.
The specific needs to be served by the new course should be indicated. Is the course to serve
as part of a required core in the major, an elective in the major, a service course for nonmajors? How will the curriculum be improved by the addition of the new course?
4. Student Interest.
The approval of a new course by the Curriculum Committee does not guarantee that the course
can in fact be added to the schedule of classes; this is contingent upon sufficient student

463

interest. What evidence is there that this interest exists? What has been the pattern of
enrollments for similar courses? Are there a sufficient number of students majoring in discipline
to support the new course? What are the prospects that the course will be attractive to nonmajors (perhaps as indicated by consultations with appropriate department chairmen)? Is there
enough student interest to suggest that the course can be offered at least once every two
years?
5. Staffing, facilities, Equipment.
A new course proposal must indicate either that the course can be staffed by existing faculty or
that appropriate arrangements have been made to secure qualified faculty. Similarly, the
facilities and equipment necessary for a new course must either be available or the means for
their acquisition must be indicated. In no case can approval of a new Course by the Curriculum
Committee be used as sufficient justification for a subsequent request for faculty, facilities or
equipment.
6. Proliferation.
Course proliferation is impossible to define in precise terms, yet it should be a matter of concern
to all who are engaged in curriculum construction. Two measures that are especially significant
are these:
(a) What is the ratio of the number courses to the number of faculty in a given
department?
(b) What is the relationship of a given course to the long range of the department?
In considering factor (a), the ratio should not be so small as to severely limit choices
available to students; but neither should it be so large to require faculty members to
engage in an unusually heavy course preparation schedule not to reduce the frequency
with which individual courses can be offered no less than once every two years. At the
current stage of development of the University, a ratio of about 3:1 or 4:1 appears
optimum.
Finally, these questions should be considered: Are the objective of the course
sufficiently broad to warrant its inclusion in an undergraduate curriculum with a strong
emphasis in the liberal arts? Does the course serve primarily the needs and interest of
the student? Is there enough student interest to suggest that the course can be offered
at least once every two years?
7. Consultation.
Course proposals in areas in which the interests of two or more departments overlap should
include an indication that appropriate consultations have taken place. Issues should be resolved
prior to discussion of proposal by University Curriculum Committee if possible.
8. Units of Credit.

464

The standard course at the University meets four hours per week and carries five (5) quarter
units of student credit. This nontraditional relationship between number of contact hours and
number of credit hours requires that courses include special out-of class components to justify
the additional credit awarded. A description of the out-of-class components must be included in
the justification for each course.
Course formats other than that of 4 class hours/5 credit hours are permissible, but
where an alternative format is used, specific justification is required. Among the
alternative formats are:
(a) Six (6) units credit. Lecture-laboratory courses meeting four hours per week
for lecture and six hours per week in laboratory.
(b) Two-and-one half (2 1⁄2) units credit. It is appropriate to propose, with
justification, a "half-course." This might be a course which, only two hours
per week for the full term or four hours per week for one-half term. The
course should have a special out-of-class component, and for reason
should carry one-half the credit of a "standard" course.
(c) Two (2) units credit. This is the standard credit awarded Activity courses
with no independent study features, e.g., physical education.
(d) One (1) unit credit. This is the smallest unit of credit that can be awarded.
(e) Variable credit. It is appropriate that variable credit (one to six units) be
used for project work (e.g., independent study, special projects) that cannot
always be defined in five-unit modules. In such cases the amount of credit
to be awarded for a specific offering of the course must be clearly indicated
in the class schedule.
9. Class Size.
Historically, the campus has attempted to foster small classes by teaching a large majority of
courses in a seminar or lecture/discussion format. This resulted in most sections having from
10-30 students with an average of around 16 students. A few classes, because of the demands
of the subject matter, must be held to a maximum of 20 students. And, of necessity, to maintain
the requisite student/faculty ratio university- wide, some classes must be of intermediate (up to
100) or large-lecture (up to 250) size. Careful consideration should be given in each course
proposal to specify a class size that is optimum for students and faculty yet responsive to the
needs of the college as a whole.
10. Prerequisites.

465

If prerequisites are listed for a course, it is assumed that normally a student cannot complete the
course satisfactorily unless the specific prerequisites have been met. Where this assumption
does not hold, prerequisites should not be listed. No checking is done in the registration process
to ensure that students have met prerequisites to a course.
11. Consent of Instructor.
If consent of instructor is to be a requirement for admission to a course, the course proposal
must indicate the criteria that will be used in granting consent. To comply with government
regulations (e.g., Title IX), these criteria made available to students through departmental
offices.
12. Courses with Changing Subject Matter.
A number of courses in the curriculum, e.g. seminars, area studies and genre courses deal with
subject matter that may change from time to time as the course is offered. The following
guidelines should be followed in proposing such courses.
(a) The course proposal should include a list of representative topics to be covered. If
any of these topics are likely to overlap or conflict with the interest of another
department/school, consultation should occur in the same manner as for other course
proposals.
(b) To introduce a new topic, the faculty member teaching the course should have the
approval of his/her department/school. Where overlap or conflict of interest with another
department/school is likely to exist, appropriate consultation should occur.
(c) If a particular topic is to be repeated frequently, it is generally more appropriate for
that topic to be proposed as a separate course than as one of a number of topics under
a more general heading.
13. Repeat of Courses for Credit.
At times, it is appropriate for a student to repeat a course for credit, but the catalog description
must always include a statement to this effect to ensure that credit will be awarded.
(a) For courses in which the subject matter changes, the course description should
include the statement, "May be repeated for credit as subject matter changes and with
consent of instructor." Moreover, where possible, the class schedule should reflect the
course content. Departments/Schools should give consideration to any limitations that
seem advisable on the number of times a course may be repeated and so indicate the
course description, e.g., "May be repeated once for credit as subject matter changes and
with consent of instructor.

466

(b) Certain advanced courses, particularly those involving independent study, special
projects or creative activities, may also be repeated for credit. In these cases, a catalog
statement such as, "May be repeated for credit with consent of instructor," is sufficient.
14. Cross-listing of Courses.
If two departments have a need to present courses of substantially the same content, this
means that whenever the course is scheduled, students will enroll through the
department/school offering the course. Justification for the cross-listing should be provided in
the course proposal, and the course description should carry the statement, "This course is also
offered as ___________ Credit for the course may be received only once.
15. Restricted Credit.
(a) Occasionally, a department may wish to offer a course for the benefit of certain
groups of students but deny credit toward major requirements. The reasons for limiting
credit should be stated in the justification and the course description should carry a
designation such as, "May not be counted toward fulfilling requirements in the major."
(b) At times, a single department/school or two related departments may offer courses
that are not identical but yet are similar enough that credit should not be awarded for
each. An appropriate designation should be included in the course description such as
"May not be counted for credit by students who have received credit for _____________.
16. General Education.
Courses that are proposed to meet general education requirements need a special justification.
Contact the Committee on General Education for applicable guidelines. Since general education
courses are, for the most part, to be offered in large lecture sections, some indication should be
given that sufficient student interest exists to produce the required enrollment.
17. Course Changes.
For course changes the amount of information required is generally less than for new
courses. Proposals for course changes need to reflect only those of the preceding
guidelines which are applicable.
18. Course Number Changes.
If the course content is revised substantially, or if the number of units is change, the
number of a course must also be changed. For minor changes in title or description, a
course number change is not required.

467

FAM 826
STUDENT DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES FOR THE CALIFORNIA
STATE UNIVERSITY AND COLLEGES
FAM 826 Student Disciplinary Procedures

March 8, 1972
TO: State College Presidents
FROM: Glenn S. Dumke, Chancellor
SUBJECT: Student Disciplinary Procedures of the California State University and Colleges, as
revised by Executive Order No. 148
I am pleased to attach five copies of Executive Order No. 148 relating to the revision of the
Student Disciplinary Procedures of the California and Colleges, along with the following
documents:
1. Student Disciplinary Procedures of the California State University and Colleges , as
revised by this Executive Order (Attachment A);
2. Memorandum of the General Counsel (Attachment B). This memorandum discusses
each change made by this Executive Order. For the most part, the changes do not
involve any major substantive modification, and will become effective on March 20,
1972.
In cases where a hearing officer from the office of Administrative Hearings (the new designation
for the Office of Administrative Procedure) is desired, arrangements should be made pursuant
to the procedure set out in my cover memorandum to Executive Order No. 116.
Please arrange appropriate distribution of the Executive Order and procedures to the various
areas concerned.
GSD/ph
Copies to: Chancellor's Staff
Last Revision 1972: Administrative/CO

468

Attachment A
Ed. Pol. -Item 6
March 21-22, 1972
1. Purpose and Scope.
a. It is the purpose of this document to provide procedures, which are fair and just, to
both the students charged and to the institution, by which it can be determined, whether
violations of conduct and conduct-related regulations have occurred.
b. These Procedures are established pursuant to Section 41304, Title 5, California
Administrative Code.* They govern determinations under Article 1, Subchapter 3,
Chapter 1, Part V of that Code, and other state and federal laws which require institution
hearings.
* Specific code sections referred to in these Procedures are set out in Appendix.
2. Authority of the President.
a. The President shall exercise his authority in disciplinary actions pursuant to Article 1,
Subchapter 3, Chapter 1, Part V of Title 5, California Administrative Code, these
Procedures, and other laws and regulations as applicable.
b. All determinations and findings made at the institution level by anyone other than the
President, including determinations and findings of the Hearing Officer (see Section 9),
are in the nature of recommendations to the President (except as otherwise provided in
Section 2-c of these Procedures), who shall have final campus authority. Decisions of
the President are subject to review by the Chancellor or his designee, and by the Board
of Trustees. The designation of Hearing Officers (see Section 9-a) and decisions on
challenges of any Hearing Officer for cause (see Section 9-f) shall be made by the
Chancellor or his designee.
c. The functions of the President as described in the following sections of these
Procedures, may be delegated by him to individual designees who are members of the
staff of the institution, and who shall exercise those functions in his name. All references
in these Procedures to the President include such designees. The President shall be
responsible for any action taken under his authority. The President may request another
institution officer or employee to perform the functions of the President under these
Procedures where in his judgement the particular circumstances merit such action, such
as when the President is a percipient witness in a disciplinary proceeding. Such requests
should be made through the President of the other institution.

469

3. Coordinator.
a. The President shall assign a member of the institution staff to be in charge of
administration of these Procedures; to perform the duties described in these Procedures;
and to perform such other as the President may determine. The person so assigned
shall serve in this assignment at the pleasure of the President.
b. The person so assigned may use such local, administrative title as the President may
determine. For convenience, he is referred to herein as "Coordinator."
c. All references in these Procedures to the Coordinator shall include any other persons
who are authorized by the President to assist the Coordinator and act in his name.
d. The Coordinator shall investigate all alleged violations of Article 1, Subchapter 3,
Chapter 1, Part V of Title 5, California Administrative Code, Section 22505 of the
Education Code and related matters concerning withdrawal of consent to remain on
campus and of eligibility for and termination of financial aid.
e. As a result of his investigation, the Coordinator shall make a recommendation to the
President as to whether the matter should proceed, and of the kind of hearing authorized
in Section 7, which should be held.
f. The Coordinator shall send such notices as are appropriate, and institute hearings
pursuant to these Procedures.
g. The Coordinator shall make physical and scheduling arrangements for the hearing of
cases.
h. Except where other provision is made with respect to hearings by an administrative
officer (Section 7-a (1)) and to residence hall matters (Section 7-a (3)), the Coordinator
shall attend the hearings and shall marshal and present the evidence against the student
charged, subject to the provisions of Section 9-I (2) of these Procedures.
4. Notices.
a. The Coordinator shall prepare and mail notices as appropriate to the student charged.
Notices addressed to him at the last address posted on the records of the Registrar of
the institution, and deposited in the United States Mail, postage prepaid, shall be
presumed to have been received and read by the student charged.
b. The Coordinator shall initiate hearing procedures against a student charged, by
mailing or delivering a notice letter to him, by registered or certified mail, return receipt
requested, which notice:
(1) Contains a statement of the charges against him, in terms of Sections 41301
and 41302 of Title 5, California Administrative Code Section 22505 of the

470

Education Code if that Section is applicable, and applicable financial aid eligibility
termination provisions, if any, a factual description stated with reasonable
particularity, of the conduct upon which the charges are based, and the office at
the institution where additional information regarding the evidence again him may
be obtained.
(2) Notifies him of the time and place of hearing.
(3) Encloses a copy of these Procedures or notifies the student of the office at
the institution where he may obtain a copy without charge. If consent to remain
on campus has been withdrawn from the student at the time this notice is sent, a
copy of these Procedures shall be enclosed with the notice.
(4) Notifies him that he may be accompanied at the hearing by an advisor of his
choice, who may act on his behalf, and who may be an attorney, and of the time
within which he must inform the Coordinator of the name and address of his
adviser if he is an attorney.
(5) Includes such information as an immediate suspension and withdrawal of
consent to remain on campus where such action has been decided upon; a
request for the student's preference as to the kind of hearing to be conducted
(Section 7), and any determination reached pursuant to Section 6-d with respect
to possible sanctions and financial aid eligibility termination pursuant to Section
11-c, whether or not the student is receiving financial aid at the time, and such
other information as the Coordinator may wish to include.
c. The notice letter may be amended at any time with respect to the information
described in Section 4-b of these Procedures. Such amendments include deletions,
additions, or other changes in the prior notice letter. In the event the amendments would
require the student to prepare a defense which is substantially different from that
required by the prior notice letter, the hearing may be postponed for a reasonable time
which should not exceed ten (10) working days. In the event the notice letter is amended
after the hearing has commenced, the Hearing Officer or Administrative Officer may, in
his discretion, continue the hearing for a reasonable time, not to exceed ten (10)
working days.
5. Immediate Suspension.
a. The President may order the immediate suspension of any student for the interim
period pending a hearing whenever he determines such action to be required in order to
protect lives or property and to ensure the maintenance of order. The student so
suspended shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing with respect to the immediate
suspension. The hearing on the immediate suspension will normally be afforded within
two working days** of the suspension. The hearing shall be held pursuant to the

471

provisions of the Section 8-a of these Procedures. The issues shall be whether his
continued suspension pending such disciplinary hearing is required in order to protect
lives or property and to ensure the maintenance of order, and on any issues
presented by a request for hearing pursuant to Penal Code Section 626.4(c).
* * "Working day" is defined in Section 12-e.
b. Immediate suspension will be coupled with a withdrawal of consent to remain on
campus, pursuant to Penal Code Section 626.4, whenever it is determined, pursuant to
that section, that there is reasonable cause to believe that the person has willfully
disrupted the orderly operation of the campus or institution facility, and that his presence
will constitute a substantial and material threat to such orderly operation.
c. The Coordinator shall be responsible for presenting evidence that a temporary
suspension, withdrawal of consent to remain on campus, or both, should be continued.
6. When Hearings are to be Held; Waivers.
a. Action under these Procedures shall go forward regardless of possible or pending
other administrative, civil or criminal proceedings arising out of the same or other events.
b. The President shall cause campus action to be initiated on the basis of the criminal
conviction of a student whenever applicable statutes or regulations require it.
c. Hearings shall be held whenever the President accepts the Coordinator's
recommendation to that effect, or does not accept a contrary recommendation from him,
and whenever required by statute, action by the Board of Trustees, or the Chancellor.
The President shall decide the kind of hearing to be held, as authorized in Section 7.
d. In any case in which a student is entitled to a hearing, the student may instead waive
a hearing and accept a sanction with respect to discipline and decision with respect to
eligibility for or termination of financial aid, as recommended by the Coordinator. The
student may accept the sanction and financial aid decision without admitting that he
engaged in the conduct charged. Should the student not accept the sanction and
financial aid decision, the matter shall proceed to hearing, and no cognizance shall be
taken of the recommendation made pursuant to Section 6-d.
7. Alternative Kinds of Hearings.
a. Based on recommendations of the Coordinator (see Section 3) and such other
considerations as may be pertinent, the President shall decide whether a disciplinary
matter should be conducted:
(1) By an administrative officer of the institution, as provided in Section 8.
(2) By the Hearing Officer, as otherwise provided in these Procedures.
(3) By a residence hall committee, in the case of charges of conduct

472

violations in residence hall facilities where the infraction charged, as
determined by the Coordinator, does not involve a possible sanction of
suspension or expulsion.
b. In making his determination, the President may consider the expressed wishes of the
student charged, the degree of apparent complexity of the facts or issues, the
seriousness of the offense, and whether the student will be represented by an attorney.
Ordinarily, the desire of the student charged for a hearing by an administrative officer,
the apparent absence of complicated facts or issues, the relative lack of seriousness of
the offense, and the student's not being represented by an attorney, are factors in favor
of a hearing by an administrative officer.
8. Office Hearings by an Administrative Officer; Hearings Under Section 7-a(3).
a. Office hearings by an administrative officer shall be informal and subject to such
procedure as the President may determine; provided that a student whose case is
considered in this way shall: receive notice of misconduct charged in terms of a general
description of the conduct and the provisions he is charged with having violated; be
informed of any evidence to be considered against him and have an opportunity to
challenge and rebut it, and to present evidence on his own behalf; be informed of the
decision of the President and of the administrative officer's recommendation to the
President. Such hearings shall be closed to all persons other than the students and the
Coordinator, a single adviser for each of them, and witnesses while they are presenting
evidence.
b. Hearings under Section 7-a(3) shall be subject to such procedures as the President
shall determine, but shall afford the student charged with at least he provisions
enumerated in Section 8-a.
9. General Provisions Relating to Hearings by Hearing Officers.
a. Hearing Officer.
(1) The Chancellor shall designate one or more Hearing Officers, who
shall serve terms as determined by the Chancellor.
(a) Hearing Officers shall be attorneys, admitted to practice law in
California who are qualified by professional experience in presiding
at judicial or quasi-judicial adversary proceedings, or who have
been members of the California State Bar for at least five years.
They will not hold any employment, or other contracts (other than
as a hearing officer) with any State College during the period of
their service.
b. Evidence.

473

The hearing need not be conducted according to technical rules relating to evidence and
witnesses. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the sort of evidence on which
responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless
of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the
admission of such evidence over objection in civil actions. Hearsay evidence may be
used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining other evidence but shall not be
sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in civil
actions. The rules of privilege shall be effective to the extent that they are otherwise
required by statute to be recognized at the hearing, and irrelevant and unduly repetitious
evidence shall be excluded. No evidence other than that received at the hearing shall be
considered by the Hearing Officer.
c. Both the student charged or his adviser and the Coordinator or his adviser shall be
entitled to present relevant evidence and to question witnesses presented by the other.
The President shall request students and employees of the institution to present
evidence at a hearing when requested on behalf of the student or the Coordinator.
d. The student will not be required to give self-incriminating evidence, and no inference
of his guilt shall be drawn by reason of his not giving evidence on this ground. In the
event the student chooses to testify, he shall no longer have this privilege.
e. The Hear Officer shall:
(1) Make all rulings on matters relating to the conduct of the hearing,
including matters regarding admission of evidence.
(2) Maintain an orderly hearing and permit no person to be subjected to
abusive treatment. He may eject or exclude anyone who refuses to be
orderly.
(3) Recognize the student charged or his adviser, and the Coordinator or
his adviser, for the purpose of questioning witnesses or presenting
argument, evidence of requests to the Hearing Officer. The Hearing
Officer may also question witnesses.
f. A student charged may challenge the Hearing Officer for cause by submitting
a written statement setting forth facts which establish that:
(1) The Hearing Officer was a participant in the event out of which the action
arose except events connected with the conduct of a hearing; or
(2) The Hearing Officer is related to or has had past association with the student
charged or his adviser, the Coordinator or his adviser, or another person who has
been adversely affected by the events giving rise to the action, which past
association is of a kind which would prejudice his judgment to the degree that it
appears that a fair hearing could not be had. "Past association" does not include
an association acquired in connection with a previous hearing.

474

Challenges must be presented at the earliest reasonable opportunity, which
normally shall be in advance of the hearing. Challenges shall be submitted to the
Coordinator, who shall immediately forward them to the Chancellor for
determination, and to the Hearing Officer; except that challenges presented at a
hearing shall be presented to the Hearing officer, who shall cause them to be
referred to the Chancellor. In the event a challenge is not presented in sufficient
time before a hearing to permit a decision by the Chancellor, the hearing may
proceed, subject to being vacated should the challenge be sustained. The
Chancellor or his designee shall determine whether the facts present grounds for
disqualification and his decision shall be final. The Hearing Officer may disqualify
himself on his own motion. No peremptory challenges may be made.
g. Following presentation of evidence, the Hearing Officer shall privately consider the
evidence with all other persons excluded and shall prepare a written report to the
President. The report, which shall ordinarily be submitted to the President within two
working days of the termination of the Hearing, shall contain as to each student charged.
(1) A summary of the facts as found by the Hearing Officer, and a
determination that the student did or did not commit the acts charged.
(2) A finding that the act did or did not constitute one of the causes for
discipline listed in Article 1, Subchapter 3, Chapter 1, Part V of Title 5
of the California Administrative Code.
(3) Findings on evidence, relevant to the issues of the case, in mitigation
or aggravation with respect to any disciplinary sanction.
(4) Findings as appropriate with respect to eligibility for and termination of
financial aid, pursuant to Section 11-c of these Procedures.
(5) A recommendation of discipline, if any.
(6) Such further report, as the Hearing Officer may consider appropriate.
h. The student charged shall be regarded as innocent of the charges against him until
the contrary is established by a preponderance of the evidence. The Hearing Officer
shall find a student to have committed the acts as to which he is charged if the Hearing
Officer is persuaded by a preponderance of the evidence that the student committed
said acts.
i. Advisers; Attorneys.
(1) The Student charged may be accompanied by one adviser of his choice, who
may act on his behalf. If he desires that his adviser be an attorney, the student
charged must give written notice of the name and office address of the attorney
to the Coordinator at least three working days before the time set for
commencement of the hearing; if there are less than four working days between
that time and the date of the notice of hearing, then the notice that his adviser will
be an attorney must be given at the earliest reasonable time. The Hearing Officer
may, in his discretion, continue the hearing in cases where the student has failed

475

to give the notice required by this Section or convene the hearing without counsel
present either for the student charged or the Coordinator. Even if notice is not
given by the student as required by this Section, the hearing shall be conducted
with counsel if the Coordinator and counsel from the Office of General Counsel
consent.
(2) Should a student charged advise that he will be accompanied by an
attorney, the Coordinator shall immediately advise the Office of General
Counsel, so that an attorney may be present with the Coordinator to
present the case.
j. Times Within Which Hearings are to Proceed.
(1) Matters preliminary to hearings shall be decided, hearings conducted, and
cases determined under these Procedures as quickly as possible, consistent with
reasonable notice.
(2) Normally, matters preliminary to hearings shall be decided and notices of
hearings given, within five working days of the time the Coordinator is informed
that a probable conduct violation or other basis for a hearing has occurred, and
of the identity of the person or persons apparently responsible.
(3) Hearings will normally be held within ten working days of the date notice is
sent to the student charged.
k. Hearings shall be closed to everyone other than the persons conducting the hearing,
the student charged and the Coordinator, a single adviser for each of them, the person
designated to record the hearing pursuant to Section 9- m, and witnesses while they are
presenting evidence.
l. It is the policy of the California State University and Colleges that evidence,
proceedings, findings and recommendations (but not the final decision of the President)
are confidential and shall not be made public by the institution or by any participant in a
hearing, including the student charged.In the event these matters should become public,
however, the institution may authorize such public statements as are appropriate and
which do not violate any legal prohibition against such statements.
m. A tape recording but not a transcription shall be kept of the hearing. The student
charged, on request, and at his own expense, subsequently may have or, under
supervision, make a copy of such recording provided that use of such a copy shall be
limited to subsequent administrative and judicial proceedings held in connection with
matter. No tape recording by the student charged or by other persons at the hearing
shall be permitted, but he student charged, at his own expense, may furnish a certified
court reporter provided that the institution shall be permitted to make copies of the

476

transcript at its own expense, and that the student's use of such transcript shall be
limited to this or subsequent administrative and judicial proceedings held in connection
with the matter. This policy of confidentiality shall not preclude the institution from taking
any action following appropriate procedures against any person or entity on the basis of
evidence developed at the hearing.
n. Consolidated Hearings.
(1) Where more than one student is charged with conduct arising out of a single
occurrence or out of connected multiple occurrences, a single hearing may be
held for all of the students so charged. Such students may request that their case
be consolidated with others, or separated from others. The Coordinator shall
make determinations regarding consolidation. All such determinations shall be
subject to revision by the Hearing Officer. In the event of such revision, all cases
affected shall be rescheduled for hearing.
(2) The separation of one or more cases from a group of cases previously set for
a consolidated hearing shall not be considered to affect the remaining cases in
the group.
o. Absence of the Student Charged.
If the student charged does not appear, (personally or through his adviser) without
satisfactory explanation for his absence having been made at his earliest opportunity, or
should he leave the hearing before its conclusions, or adjournment, the hearing shall
proceed without him, and the Hearing Officer shall render a decision based on the
available evidence and make his report just as though the student charged had been
present throughout the hearing. The fact that an administrative hearing or a civil or
criminal trial for the student is pending shall not be considered a satisfactory explanation
unless the actual hearing or trial date conflicts with the institution hearing date, or unless
it is physically impossible for the student charged to attend the institution hearing.
10. Presidential Action.
a. The President may establish a procedure whereby a committee of students, or
students together with faculty or students together with faculty and administrative
personnel, shall, in such cases as the President may determine, review the
recommendations of the Hearing Officer with respect to the discipline to be imposed, if
any, and advise the President. Such committees, if established, shall be composed in
such manner as the institution may determine. It shall not receive new evidence or
argument, or conduct hearing, and its members shall be bound by the policy of
confidentiality as stated in Section 9-l. If such a committee is established, the President
shall forward a copy of the report of the Hearing Officer to the committee as soon as it is
received, and the committee shall present its recommendations, if any, to the President
within two working days of its receipt of the report.

477

b. The President shall review the report of the Hearing Officer, and recommendations if
any, of any committee established pursuant to Section 10a. He may take the action
recommended by the Hearing Officer; he may adopt a lesser sanction; he may, if
necessary, refer the matter back to the Hearing Officer for further findings on specified
issues; or, after a review of the record, he may adopt a more severe sanction. In cases
where a committee has not been established pursuant to Section 10-a, the President
normally shall render his decision within three working days of receipt of the
recommendations of the Hearing Officer. In cases where such a committee has been
established, the President normally shall render his decision within three working days of
receipt of the recommendations of the Committee, and no later than six working days
after initial receipt of the report of the Hearing Officer.
c. The President shall cause notification of his action to be sent to the student charged. If
the action taken is suspension or expulsion with denial of access to the campus and
institution facilities, notification shall be by certified or registered mail. The report of the
Hearing Officer, and the recommendations of any committee established pursuant to
Section 10-a, shall be made available to the student.
d. if the action taken is suspension or expulsion, and the student charged is a minor, his
parent or guardian shall be notified of the action by certified or registered mail, return
receipt requested, sent to the parent or guardian's last address posted on the records of
the Registrar.
11. Discipline Which May Be Imposed; Eligibility for and Termination of Financial Aid.
a. Students may be expelled, suspended, placed on probation, or given a lesser
sanction, as provided in Section 41301 of title 5, California Administrative Code.
b. Students who are expelled or suspended on the basis of conduct which disrupted the
orderly operation of the campus or any facility of an institution, may be denied access to
all or any part of the campus or other facility:
(1) In the case of expulsion, for up to one year.
(2) In the case of suspension, for a period up to the period of the suspension.
c. Determination on Eligibility for and Termination of Financial Aid. Concurrently with
actions under these Procedure, the person conducting the hearing shall also determine
whether the particular conduct found to have occurred is a basis for ineligibility for or
termination of financial aid under applicable provisions of State or Federal Law, and of
the Board of Trustees, whether or not the student is receiving financial aid at the time.
Financial aid shall be terminated or eligibility denied by the President whenever required
by any of these provisions.
(1) Hearings by a hearing board on questions of financial aid termination
shall be held where required by Education Code Section 31292.

478

12. Other Provisions.
a. A student enrolled at an institution who is accused of conduct subject to disciplinary
action at another institution, shall be subject to disciplinary action at the campus with
respect to which the violation is alleged to have occurred, and all references to the
President, the Coordinator, and the Hearing Officer shall refer to those persons at that
campus; provided that the President of the institution at which the student is enrolled
shall make the final decision with respect to discipline.
b. Hearings on qualifications for admission or denial of admission pursuant to Section
41303 of Title 5, California Administrative Code, shall be conducted pursuant to Sections
8 or 9 of these Procedures, as the President shall determine.
c. The President may combine the duties of Coordinator with those of any other officer or
employee, but may not combine such duties with those of the administrative officer
assigned to conduct to conduct an office hearing pursuant to Section 8 of these
Procedures, or with those of the Hearing Officer.
d. Arguments by the student charged or his adviser concerning the legal (as
distinguished from factual) applicability, or legal validity of any provision on the basis of
which the student is charged, or of these Procedures shall not be addressed to the
person hearing the case, but to the President, as soon as the hearing has concluded.
The President shall seek advice on the matter from the Office of General Counsel. Such
advice shall be considered by him before a final decision is rendered.
e. As used in these Procedures, "working day" shall mean any day during the college
year, summer session, and summer term other than a Saturday, Sunday, academic
holiday of the institution as that term is used in 5 California Administrative Code Section
42800, or holiday as defined in Government Code Section 18025.
f. As used in these Procedures, "attorney" shall mean any person who is admitted to
practice before any state or federal court.
g. Technical departures from these Procedures and errors in their application shall not
be grounds to withhold disciplinary action or a determination of ineligibility for or
termination of financial aid unless, in the opinion of the President, the technical
departures or errors were such as to have prevented a fair and just determination of the
issues.
h. As used in these Procedures, "institution" shall mean a California State
University or College.

479

Attachment B
MEMORANDUM OF THE GENERAL COUNSEL
On August 19, 1970, Executive Order 109 was issued, providing a system-wide set of
procedures for handling student disciplinary matters. The Board of Trustees confirmed the
Administrative regulation authorizing the Chancellor to issue and revise these Procedures. On
October 30, 1970, Executive Order No. 116 was issued, revising the Student Disciplinary
Procedures. As was stated in my memorandum attached to Executive Order No. 116, the
Procedures would continue to be tested in practice and carefully scrutinized to determine
whether, based upon experience, they should be further revised.
After consultation with the interested parties, a revised Student Disciplinary Procedure is issued
by Executive Order No. 148. Those consulted on these revised procedures were the
Chancellor's Council of State College Presidents, the California State College Student
Presidents Association, the Academic Senate, the Deans of Students and others concerned
with the administration of the Procedures.
For the most part, the changes in the Procedures do not involve any major substantive
modification. The nature of the changes as well as the small number of changes which were
made, are a comment upon the overall effectiveness of Executive Order No. 116. For ease of
review, each change in the Procedures made by this Executive Order is identified and
discussed in the paragraphs which follow:
The Procedures have been physically reorganized and renumbered to provide greater
clarity. This was a suggestion of California State College Student Presidents
Association.
Changes have been made throughout the Procedures to reflect the name change enacted by
the Legislature.
1-b Modifies references to particular Title 5 provisions to refer to appropriate Article in
Title 5, rather than referring to specific sections. Any new sections within that Article will
then be automatically included in the Reference.
2-c Provides for the circumstances when it would be inappropriate for a particular
president to perform the functions otherwise requires by the Procedures.
3-h Clarifies that when a student is represented by an attorney; an attorney
from the office of General Counsel will present the institution's case.
4b (1) Provides that the notice letter include a statement concerning the office
where the student may obtain additional information regarding evidence

480

against him.
4b (5) Clarifies that certain financial aid eligibility determinations be made whether or not
the student is receiving financial aid.
4-c This new section provides for amendment of the notice letter.
5-a Clarifies that hearings on immediate suspensions will be held not later than ten
"calendar day" of the "commencement of the suspension."
7-b Includes the fact of representation by an attorney, as one for the criteria determining
which type of hearing will be held.
9-b Provides that the privilege against self-incrimination is lost in the event the student
chooses to testify. While no 9-d change has been made in this section of the
Procedures, the student representatives requested a brief explanation of the phrase in
Section 9-b; "rules of privilege shall be effective to the extent that they are otherwise
required by statute." Since maintenance of the confidentiality of certain relationships is
considered of greater value than the disclosure of evidence of which is acquired within
those relationships, the Legislature has adopted rules of privilege through which such
confidential information may be excluded in any proceeding in which testimony can be
compelled by law to be given. This section makes these rules of privilege applicable to
student disciplinary proceedings. Examples of such communications include most
statements made in confidence in the course of lawyer-client, physician-patient,
psychotherapist-patient, clergyman-penitent, and husband-wife relationships. Such
communications may be excluded from evidence if an appropriate objection to their
receipt is made. The privilege may be waived by a person entitled to waive it. Thus, the
patient, but not the physician, may be waive the privilege against admission of
statements made within the physician-patient relationship; and the client, but not the
attorney, may waive the similar privilege with respect to communications within the
lawyer-client relationship.
9g(3) Provides that findings on evidence of mitigation or aggravation is limited
to relevant issues of the case.
9j(2) Increases from three to five days the time in which matters preliminary to hearings
should be accomplished and notice letters given. (Those who administer such matters
felt that the previous time limit was too short.)

481

9-m Deletes requirement that a student provide the institution with a free copy of any
court reporter's transcript. The new provision permits the institution to make copies at its
own expense.
10-a Clarifies that the president may utilize the review committee in such cases as he
may determine.
12-e Redefines "working day" to exclude academic holidays.
12-f Defines "attorney."

FAM 827.3
DISTRIBUTED LEARNING POLICY
FAM 827.3 Distributed Learning Policy
Preamble
The central tenet of this document is to preserve and protect the academic quality of courses
offered through California State University, San Bernardino. The university seeks to preserve
academic freedom, encourage innovation and instruction and support the faculty’s collective
responsibility to ensure the academic quality and integrity of the University's courses, programs
and degrees. Distributed learning may allow the University to more fully achieve its mission by
addressing such factors as the large service area, dispersed student population, expected
enrollment growth and limited space on campus. In all circumstances, academic excellence
takes precedence over managerial or economic efficiencies (Attachment 3).
Definitions
Distributed learning in this document means any mode of electronically mediated
instruction where class members are not, nor are expected to be, in the same physical
location as the instructor during the regularly scheduled class time.
For this document, the specific distributed learning definitions are designated by the
Chancellor’s Office and placed into the course schedule by Academic Scheduling (see
Appendix I).
This policy does not apply to off-campus, on-site, live instruction, which is covered in
FAM 819.5 Off-Campus Courses Offered as a Part of the Regular College Program.
This policy shall apply to all credit-bearing courses and programs offered through
distributed learning by California State University, San Bernardino. Nothing in this policy
shall imply that distributed learning is a preferred or required mode of instruction

482

A. General Principles Applicable to the Distributed Learning Policy
1. The campus will adhere to regulations for distributed learning provided by the
appropriate accreditation bodies (WASC, et al.).
2. Distributed learning courses (hybrid and fully online) and programs shall be
consistent with the educational mission and practices of the department, college,
and the University.
4. Tenure-track faculty are essential to the academic integrity of any program including
those offered via distributed learning. Academic content should be developed and
delivered under the direction of the CSUSB tenure-track faculty. The individual faculty
owns the course materials, unless there is a contract specifying otherwise.
5. No faculty member shall be compelled (directly or indirectly) to teach via
distributed learning without his/her consent. This component of the policy shall
not apply to off-campus, on-site, live instruction (see FAM 819.5).
6. Admissions criteria to credit-bearing classes and programs shall be
comparable for students on and off campus. Some programs may have unique
admissions criteria.
7. Students and faculty shall have appropriate access to the University library
resources and services.
8. The University shall offer appropriate training and support services to faculty
teaching distributed learning courses, using various learning modalities, including
online and face-to-face options. All university computers and technologies should
be updated regularly.
9. The University shall offer appropriate training and support services to students
taking distributed learning courses, using various learning modalities, including
online and face-to-face options.
10. Faculty and students have a right to know the modes of delivery and technological
requirements of each course, program and degree offered by the University. Students
shall have access to this information before enrolling in a course or program, subject to
the provisions in section B.2 below. The Mode of Instruction cannot be changed after
registration for classes has started unless the applicable Chair and Dean approve in
extraordinary circumstances.
11. "Faculty should make reasonable efforts to ensure that technology requirements for
successful completion of the class are appropriate.

483

12. Faculty teaching hybrid courses should stipulate as soon as possible before the
course commences, the approximate number of face-to-face sessions that are to be
replaced by online sessions or activities. If course management (for example, faculty
assignment and scheduling) makes it impossible to inform students before they have
enrolled, students shall be informed of the approximate number of face-to-face versus
and online sessions or activities in the syllabus. Students shall have access to this
information as soon as is reasonable before beginning a course.
13. Unless otherwise explicitly stated, current University policies and procedures also
apply.
B. Curriculum and Instruction
Technology is changing quickly and influencing the development of new models of
teaching and learning. At the same time, these new technologies are playing an
increasingly important role in society. The university, its faculty, staff, and administration
work to ensure that these new technologies promote CSUSB’s standards of academic
excellence.
1. Since the curricular process approves the content of all for-credit new courses,
new courses taught in a distributed learning format (see definition in preamble)
must first go through the regular curricular approval process.
2. In the case of existing courses, approval for the use of distributed learning is
within the purview of the department/school and/or program subject to the
principles set forth in this Policy.
3. In the event of a complaint or a dispute regarding the delivery mode of any
course, the department chair/school director and/or college dean will conduct a
review that follows university procedures and expressly takes into account the
principles listed in this Policy.
4. At the program level, quality of courses is the purview of the program in which
the course resides and periodic program reviews by departments and programs
should be undertaken to evaluate and ensure the effectiveness of instruction of
distributed learning courses. Care should be taken to abide by the standards
established by the appropriate accrediting agencies. Programmatic use of
distributed learning may constitute a "substantive change" in the program, as
defined by WASC, and necessitate a WASC review. Other accreditations may
also be affected, as well as the availability of federal financial assistance under
Title IV of the Higher Education Act.
5. The university shall not contract with any private or public entity to deliver
distributed learning courses or programs to that entity without the prior approval

484

of the relevant department/school or Program, for such entity to deliver
distributed learning courses or programs to CSUSB without the prior approval of
the relevant department/school or program, nor to deliver that entity's distributed
learning courses or programs in place of or in addition to CSUSB courses without
the prior approval of the relevant department/school or program.
C. Faculty
1. The development and utilization of distributed learning must not be used to reduce or
eliminate tenure-track faculty positions.
2. A faculty member may choose to offer office hours electronically after consultation
with and approval of the department chair/school director and dean.
3. Class size and faculty workload will be determined by the college dean after
consultation with the faculty member and the department chair/school director, and must
take into account the level of interaction between faculty and students.
4. Because distributed learning may involve the use of technologies and teaching
methods which require specialized training, the faculty member engaged in distributed
learning is responsible for making use of the university-offered resources and training
where appropriate.
D. Support for Distributed Learning: Facilities and Resources
1. Consistent with the mission of CSUSB, the university must provide funding for
distributed learning as appropriate without impairment of resources for other modes of
instruction.
2. The university shall provide appropriate information, support and training to faculty for
compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act. The university will provide the same
level of support to students regardless of modality.
3. Faculty choosing to use non-university-supported resources (e.g. third- party servers,
non-university-supported software) must state in their syllabus that the university will not
provide technical support for those resources and that the university does not endorse
any products which may be advertised through those resources. These faculty are
responsible for compliance with all principles of this policy, including, reasonable,
technical support for students. Faculty who use university supported resources shall not
be held responsible for technical support of these resources.
4. University policies concerning evaluations of teaching effectiveness and
outcomes assessment also apply.
E. Support for Distributed Learning: Student Services

485

1. The Office of Academic Technologies and Innovation (or designee) will
handle student questions and refer students to appropriate available
services for distributed learning.
2. The university must provide:
● access to the range of student services appropriate to support distributed
learning courses including admissions, financial aid, academic advising, delivery
of course materials and placement and counseling;
●

adequate means for resolving student complaints;

●
●

adequate information about and resources for obtaining the
technical competence to use the necessary technologies; information about
access to library and other learning services;

●

information about access to other available university support services;

●

assistance to prospective students in understanding the nature and potential
challenges of learning in distributed learning environments; and

●

technical support for hardware and software.

3. Advertising, recruiting and admissions information must adequately and accurately
represent the requirements and services available for distributed learning courses and
programs.
F. Academic Integrity
1. The academic integrity of a course is ultimately the responsibility of the faculty
member. The university must inform faculty involved in distributed learning about the
variety of assessment tools, the relative level of security of these assessments and
methods for limiting students' use of unauthorized resources. The university will provide
criteria for ensuring student identity.
2. The university will provide reasonable accommodation for assessment services for
courses taught via distributed learning.
3. Consistent with the university policy on plagiarism and cheating, reasonable
safeguards shall be in place to ensure academic honesty.
4. Faculty are responsible for adhering to CSUSB's Intellectual Property Policy (FAM
500.8) and Acceptable Use Policy for Electronic Communications.

486

G. The Academic and Distributed Technologies Committee
Membership: The Academic and Distributed Technologies Committee shall include one
faculty member from each College. Members shall serve two-year staggered terms,
with the possibility of one-year terms to ensure that staggering ensues. The committee
shall also include, as non-voting members, the Director of the Office of Academic
Technologies and Innovation, the Faculty Associate of ATI, the Dean (or designee) of
the College of Extended Learning, and the Director (or designee) of the Teaching
Resource Center. The Committee shall select a chair or co-chairs at the beginning of
each academic year from among the voting members of the committee.
Duties:
1) The Academic and Distributed Technologies Committee will monitor policy issues
that arise with regard to the University Policy on Distributed Learning and shall,
as it considers appropriate, (a) refer a particular issue to one of the standing
committees of the Faculty Senate for the development of a policy or (b) develop
a policy on a particular issue itself and then refer the proposed policy to the
Executive Committee of the Faculty Senate.
2) The Committee will monitor and report on instructional technology and distributed
learning trends and issues on campus.
3) The Committee shall seek to gather and represent faculty perspectives on
questions relating to teaching, learning, or researching with instructional
technologies, including distributed learning and other learning technologies, and
it will work with ATI to provide services and support to the faculty. Faculty are
free to bring questions and requests for support to either the Committee or ATI
as they choose.
4) The Committee will recommend to ATI mechanisms that will support faculty in
staying current on instructional technologies and distributed learning, such as
opportunities for training, experimenting with emerging technologies, and support
from instructional designers.
5) The Committee will be responsible for gathering feedback from faculty on the
effectiveness and usability of the instructional technologies employed.
H. Annual Report
The Academic and Distributed Technologies Committee shall oversee the production of
an annual distributed learning report will be made available to the university community.
The Office of Academic Technologies and Innovation shall produce the report. The
report shall discuss the state of distributed learning at CSUSB, including campus trends

487

for online courses. Specific topics and issues to be addressed are, among others,
distributed learning growth trends, the nature of hybrid courses, department and
program online activity summaries, faculty workload issues, student and faculty
perceptions of quality, and future directions.
Appendix 1 – Chancellor Office Coding
Additional Instruction Modes have been implemented and Learning modes will be
delivered by the Common Management System Division of the Chancellor’s Office and
will be required for all class sections effective fall 2015. These include:
• OL - Online Class Section. Some campus meetings may be required for orientation,
mid-term, final exam. No instructional face-to-face meetings (coded Learning Mode 03 –
considered 100% online).
• FO – Fully Online Class Section. Class section in compliance with AB386. No campus
meetings required, no designated day/time for synchronous interaction with instructor.
(coded Learning Mode 01 – considered 100% online). Class section also requires an
additional Course Attribute row of Fully Online/AB-386
• HO – Hybrid Online Instruction with Synchronous Classroom Instruction Component.
Hybrid course section where online is the method of instruction but a specific day and
time is scheduled for the term. Students may need to come to campus occasionally on
the designated day and time and/or participate in a synchronous format/interaction with
the instructor during the designated day/time (coded as Learning Mode 05 – considered
100% online).
• HC – Hybrid Classroom Instruction with Online Instruction Component. Hybrid course
section, students are required to participate on-campus/face-to-face in a designated
classroom on a specific day and time in addition to an online instruction component
(coded Learning Mode 06 – considered as hybrid with percentage online instruction less
than 80%)
• CO – CEL Online. College of Extended Learning Online. Used by the College of
Extended Learning to differentiate between main campus and College of Extended
Learning online class section offerings (coded Learning Mode 03 – considered 100%
online)
• CM – CourseMatch Class Section. For courses that have been approved for
CourseMatch. No campus meetings required, no designated day/time for synchronous
interaction with instructor. (coded Learning Mode 01 – considered 100% online). Class
section also requires an additional Course Attribute row of Fully Online/CourseMatch

488

• OC – Class Section Located Off-Campus. Face-to-face instruction required at an on off
campus location identified on the Meetings page for the section (coded Learning Mode
09 – considered 100% face-to-face).
• P - Classroom Instruction. Standard instruction with face-to-face meetings. Supervision
courses, unless specifically designated otherwise, are also coded as P (coded Learning
Mode 09 – considered 100% face-to-face).
• TO - Televised Class Section-Origination Site. Class section broadcasting in synch with
PDC class section (coded Learning Mode 09 – considered 100% face-to-face).
• TR - Televised Class Section-Receive Site. Class section receiving broadcast in synch
with PDC class section (coded Learning Mode 09 – considered 100% face-to-face).
• Z - Zero Units Instruction, use for courses without units (for non-resident graduate
tuition calculation– coded Learning Mode 09 – considered 100% face-to-face although
zero unit courses are not reported in APDB).

FAM 831.75
POLICY CONCERNING SIMULTANEOUS ENROLLMENT
FAM 831.75 Simultaneous Enrollment

Procedures have been established whereby a student may enroll in two courses that are
scheduled to meet at overlapping times. The student should procure a Petition for Waiver of
University Regulations from Student Services, meet with instructors for both of the courses
involved to make special arrangements and obtain the written approval of both instructors. The
petition must be filed prior to the student's registration for the quarter.

FAM 832.4
POLICY ON FINAL EXAMINATIONS
FAM 832.4 - Policy on Final Examinations

Purpose and Scope
The purpose of this FAM is to describe policies for the final examination period.
Policy Statement

489

The days designated for "final examinations" are counted among the academic workdays
constituting the officially defined academic term. Faculty members, therefore, must have a
final class-related activity with their students for any course classified as a lecture or seminar.
The final class-related activity must take place during the university's scheduled "final
examination" week.
If a course has a synchronous (in-person or online) final exam, the exam should occur during
its designated day and time listed in the final examination schedule; note: this option is only
available for in-person, synchronous online, or hybrid courses. In courses with a final exam
that is not synchronous, the exam should occur within a reasonable timeframe during the final
examination week.
If a course does not include a final exam, the faculty member must use the final examination
week to engage students in another final course-related activity, such as but not limited to
synthesizing the course material, giving final presentations, completing course papers or
projects, or meeting individually with the faculty member to discuss final assignments. These
activities may occur in-person or virtually, synchronously or asynchronously, no matter what
the overall mode of instruction of the course. It is the purview of faculty members, as experts
in their disciplines, to determine what final class-related activities will most benefit student
learning. If an activity requires the whole class to be together at a certain time (e.g., giving
presentations, having a final class discussion, etc.), it should occur at the designated day and
person, synchronous online, or hybrid courses.
All final exams, activities, and assignments must be due no later than the last day of the final
examination week listed in the class schedule.
Petitions to Deviate from the Published Final Exam Schedule
Where relevant, deviations from the published exam schedule, or changes in time or location of
the final exam or final class activity must receive prior approval from the Department Chair (or
School Director) and Dean. The form from the Office of Academic Scheduling and Curriculum
requesting any deviations is available here. Petitions and forms for requesting such approval
should be submitted as early in the term as possible, but no later than the twelfth week of the
term.
Approvals
Approved by the Faculty Senate on April 25, 2023
Signed by the President on
History
First created: ____ [Date] by _____ _
Revised: 2023 [Date] by --=E'-'--P-'-R=C _____ _
Renumbered: ____ [Date] from ___ to ___ _

490

FAM 835.65
PRINTING AND SELLING FACULTY PUBLICATIONS ON CAMPUS
STEPS IN THE PROCESS
1. A completed Course Materials Requisition Form bearing authorized signatures of the
Chairperson/Director and/or Dean must be submitted to the Book Department at Coyote
Bookstore.
2. A "Copy Ready" manuscript must be submitted along with the Course Materials
Requisition Form in order to be processed.
3. All manuscripts must be accompanied by a completed request to duplicate/sell
materials form as well as the Copyright Clearance Center authorization form.
4. A master of each manuscript will be kept on file at the Coyote Bookstore. Upon
completion of the publication, the "Original Manuscript: will be returned to you upon
request.
5. Upon receipt of the manuscript by the Book Department, the finished product will take
two to six weeks for completion. Each manuscript varies according to size, amount of
copyrighted material, and any specialized instructions.
(Manuscripts will not excepted via inter-campus mail delivery)
DUE DATES
We are requesting that faculty observe the following due dates:
Quarter

Date

Fall
Quarter...........

May 14

Winter
Quarter.......

October
23

Spring
Quarter.......

January
17

Summer
Sessions

April 15

491

Manuscripts submitted within two weeks of class start dates may not be guaranteed for sale on
the first day of classes. To help insure prompt completion a 10% late handling fee will be
invoiced to the academic department/school.
PRICING
The Bookstore will add an industry standard 23% margin to the duplicating costs to obtain a
retail selling price for all custom course publications.
DESK COPIES
The bookstore will provide at no charge to the academic department one copy of each finished
publication to each faculty adopting the publication for the current term. Additional copies will be
made available to the department/school at cost plus 5%.
SELECT THE FORM(S) BELOW TO VIEW OR PRINT
1. REQUEST TO DUPLICATE / SELL COURSE MATERIALS AT BOOKSTORE
2. COPYRIGHT CLEARANCE CENTER APS REQUEST FORM (See instructions for request
form)

FAM 836.1
FIELD TRIPS
FAM 836.1 Field Trips
The information and procedures, which follow, have been assembled to assist faculty in
planning course field trips. The procedures were developed after consultation with attorneys,
and we are advised that they constitute the minimum requirements to protect both students and
faculty in the event of accident or injury.
These procedures apply only to field trips recommended or required of students as a regularly
scheduled part of course work or assignments. Faculty planning extra- curricular College or
College-related functions may consult with the Activities Office of Student Personnel Services.
Procedures Applicable to All Trips
1. Complete a Field Trip Request Form and forward it to the College Dean. Where frequent field
trips are a required portion of a regularly scheduled course, and this is stated as part of the
course description in the College Catalog, a Field Trip Request Form need be completed only
once at the beginning of the term.

492

2. The College Dean shall review the request, and approve it where
appropriate.
3. Obtain and carry along on each field trip: completed authorization to consent to medical
treatment forms for students under 18 years of age; and a few insurance claim forms. These
may be obtained from the College Office or Student Health Services.
The parental consent form is not necessary where the trip involves no College-furnished
transportation, students arrive at the trip site "on their own" rather than in a caravan,
and where the trip activities are of a relatively short duration and involve virtually no risk
of injury, such as a museum tour, visiting another institution, hearing a presentation, etc.
Where parental or guardian consent is difficult or impossible to obtain, the Dean of
Students Office may be able to waive this requirement, under appropriate
circumstances, described in Civil Code Section 34.6.
Arranging for Ground Transportation
Where possible, arrange to meet students at the field trip site; however, if you must provide
transportation for students, do so in a State car driven by a State employee.
Regulations affecting the use of State cars may be obtained in the College Office. Where
desirable, and providing funds are available, the instructor may prefer to ravel by commercial
carrier, such as a charter bus. To arrange payment for this, the College Secretary should send a
requisition to the Purchasing Department prior to the trip so that a service order can be mailed
to the Bus Company.
If Your Trip Includes Visit to or Use of Private Property
Secure permission of the owner to use his property. In some instances, the owner of the
facility or site may require a "hold-harmless" agreement signed by the College. This
agreement, which is drawn up by the College Business Office, and reviewed by the
Chancellor's Auxiliary and Business Services Staff, requires several weeks for approval.
(A Hold-Harmless Agreement is a contract between the College and a private
landowner in which the College agrees to hold the owner "safe and harmless" from any
accident or injury arising as a result of the College's use of the landowner's property.
Reference ABS-68-29)
A Word About Insurance
In the event of accident or injury, State employees, including Student Assistants, are
covered by Workmen's Compensation Insurance, provided their presence on the field
trip is within the scope of their employment responsibilities. Students are covered by the

493

ASB trip insurance and by the basic medical plan of the College. However, if there are
circumstances involving unusual risk, the faculty are advised to require students to
purchase supplemental medical insurance, available in the Activities office at
approximately .35 cents per person.
Some faculty have asked about the extent of their liability in the event of injury or
accident. The Legal staff of the Chancellor's Office has been asked for a statement, and
their discussion of this matter is on file in the Academic Affairs Office and available to
those interested.
In Case of Injury, Illness, or Auto Breakdown
If a sick or injured student is under 18 years of age, make every effort to contact his
parent or guardian to obtain consent for medical treatment. When this is not possible,
present the completed "Authorization to Consent to Medical Treatment" form to the
attending physician or hospital.
The College's student health insurance policy provides payment for emergency
treatment anywhere at any time. In the event of an accident or illness, provide the
attending physician or hospital with the insurance claim form. Students who receive
treatment must sign the claim form, unless incapacitated. Upon your return to campus,
inform the Health Center of the accident or illness, the name of the hospital where the
student was treated, and the name of the attending physician.
First Aid kits can be obtained from the Health Center if the faculty member wishes to
carry one on the trip.
In the event of an automobile breakdown in a State vehicle, consult the travel log
(carried in every State vehicle) on how to obtain assistance and repairs. The travel log
provides instructions which can help avoid unnecessary difficulties and expense.
If You Plan to Travel by Air
Providing sufficient funds are available, it might be necessary to fly to and from the field
trip site. In that event, travel arrangements should be completed by the College Office.
Flights may be scheduled only on approved air carriers. A listing of carriers is on file in
the Dean of Student's Office. Airline agreements should be made through the Business
Office well in advance of the trip.
If You Plan to Leave the State
Obtain prior approval of the Vice President's Office, for each State employee on the trip,
if you plan to visit sites outside of California. Such out-of-state travel requests are
processed through the Dean of Academic Administration's Office.
If You Plan to Visit Mexico

494

Obtain an appropriate Tourist Card for each person on the field trip. The Single Entry
Card, good for 180 days, permits one entry without charge. Note that each applicant
must present, in person, proof of U.S. Citizenship at a Mexican Consulate. A Multiple
Entry Card, good for 180 days, permits unlimited number of border crossings, without
charge. Each applicant must present, in person, proof of U.S. Citizenship and three
passport size photographs at a Mexican Consulate.
Tourist cards, necessary for all visitors 15 years of age or older, are not necessary for
border town visits up to 72 hours.
Arrange for appropriate automobile insurance. U.S. automobile insurance is not valid in
Mexico; therefore, if State cars are to be used (as recommended), request the College
Business Office to obtain Mexican insurance for them.
Concerning Collecting in Mexico
Archaeological collections are forbidden by the Government of Mexico.
Collection and exportation of wild animals is prohibited without a permit. To obtain the
necessary permit, write:
Director General de Corzo
Direccion General de la Fauna
Silvestre A.S.G.
Aquiles Serdan Numero 28
70 Piso
Mexico 3 D.F.
Mexico
Explain your position, the college you represent, and list each type of animal you wish to
collect and export. This permit is also honored by U.S. Customs for importation
purposes.
The College has a permit to import regulation 4B seeds and regulation 6 admissible nursery
stock not subject to post-entry quarantine. These plants may be legally imported only through
the ports of: El Paso, Los Angeles, Nogales, San Diego, and San
Francisco. Citrus and citrus-related plants cannot be imported.

FAM 838.4
POLICY CONCERNING GUIDELINES FOR THE GENERAL EDUCATION
PROGRAM
FAM 838.4 Policy Concerning Guidelines for the General Education Program
The following policy guidelines are established for the General Education Program:

495

1. The Oral Communication and Critical Thinking requirements should be separated into
a two-course requirement under a Basic Skills Category, along with Written
Communication and Mathematics.
2. The Critical Thinking requirement should be opened up to courses from several
departments/schools, notably Philosophy, Psychology and Communication, according to
the criteria designed for that requirement which appears in Attachment 2.
3. A Critical Thinking Oversight committee , made up of a representative from each
department/school that offers a Critical Thinking course and chaired by the Dean of
Undergraduate Studies, shall meet regularly to discuss the common goals of these
various courses, ensure that these goals are being met, and propose ways to reinforce
critical thinking in the curriculum as a whole.
4. A two-unit requirement in the Natural Sciences Breadth Area shall be established
entitled Special Topics in Science and Technology. Courses fulfilling this requirement
shall meet the criteria presented in Attachment 2.
5. The Letters Section of the Humanities Breadth Area shall be divided into one required
course in Literature and one required course either in a foreign language or in foreign
literature in translation.
6. A separate four-unit requirement in Philosophy shall be included in the Humanities
Breadth Area and an appropriate course in the Philosophy Section shall be permitted to
satisfy the Philosophy and the Critical Thinking requirements.
7. The lower division portion of the Social and Behavioral Sciences Breadth Area shall
be divided into four four-unit requirements: American History and Civilization, American
Institutions, World Cultures, and Discipline Perspectives, with courses meeting these
requirements according to the criteria in Attachment 2. Students passing proficiency
tests in American History and Civilization and/or American Institutions shall be required
to take other courses listed under the Social and Behavioral Sciences in order to
complete a minimum of 16 lower division quarter units in this breadth area.
8. Students shall have the option of completing the Upper Division Writing Requirement
either by taking an expository writing (495) course in any college or by passing a
proficiency exam. Students who pass the proficiency exam may use the four units of the
Writing Course requirement as free electives. The Upper Division Writing Requirement
course shall be numbered as a 300-series course, and departments/schools encouraged
to make it a prerequisite for senior seminar, capstone, and other senior major
courses as they deem feasible, so that students will take the writing course as early as
possible in their upper-division programs.

496

9. A requirement should be established that all students must take one approved, four
unit upper division course in multiculturalism/gender. This requirement shall be met by
taking either one Integrative Capstone course or multicultural/gender course designated
as meeting this requirement.
10. In view of the growing importance of computer skills to the lifelong learning and
academic and vocational competence of students, at such time as the CSU system,
CSUSB Faculty Senate, and campus community determine computer skills to be an
essential part of the general education preparation of students, relevant goals, criteria,
and course requirements shall be developed and instituted in the G.E. program.
11. The requirement that all students shall take three upper division Integrative
Capstone courses, one in each of the three breadth areas of Humanities, Natural
Sciences, and the Social and Behavioral Sciences, shall be revised as follows:
* Freshmen and Sophomores should not be permitted to enroll in these
courses, and faculty should be permitted to recommend to a designated
administrative office that Freshmen and Sophomores who do appear in
class be "disenrolled";
* Faculty workload in the capstone courses should be reduced to a
manageable level by providing additional workload credits, student
assistants, or both as deemed appropriate by colleges, so that faculty
may require written assignments of sufficient rigor for capstone courses
to meet their mandated requirements to provide synthesis of knowledge
across breadth areas and build upon basic skills;
* Departments/Schools should institute systematic oversight of capstones
to ensure that the courses are requiring appropriate written work, and
can so demonstrate to the General Education committee in its annual
category reviews;
12. The Lifelong Understanding component of General Education should be substantially met by
a four-unit requirement in physical education, mandatory for all students, which would include
two units of activity and a two-unit course on the human being as an integrated physiological,
social, and psychological being. A separate University Physical Education requirement outside
of G.E. shall then be abolished. 13. Upper division transfer students shall be required to
complete any outstanding lower division General Education requirements they may have within
their first two quarters of residence here.
13. The U.S. History, Constitution, and State and Local Government requirement should once
again be met by a minimum of two approved courses, as described in Attachment 3. Students
passing proficiency tests to complete this requirement should still be required to take sixteen
units of lower division course work in the Social and Behavioral Sciences Breadth

497

Area.
14. The Office of the Dean of Undergraduate Studies shall be designated as the administrative
home of General Education and should be given responsibility, in consultation with the General
Education Committee, Faculty Senate, and/or colleges as appropriate, for the following support,
oversight, and coordination duties:
1) administrative support for G.E. Committee activities including but not
limited to annual G.E. category reviews and periodic G.E. program
reviews;
2) general oversight of G.E. course programming and scheduling,
investigating and making recommendations regarding
programming/scheduling problems;
3) design and administration of a system of periodic voluntary faculty
training for G.E., to include the following:
(i) faculty workshops to educate faculty in goals and objectives of
G.E. courses.
(ii) establishment of common criteria for G.E. course syllabi.
(iii) specification of desirable features of G.E. courses such as
requirements for extensive written work and group/cooperative
projects.
(iv) development of G.E. orientation tools (e.g., literature, visual and
audio cassettes) for students and for faculty teaching G.E.
courses.
15. Advising shall be as strongly encouraged as possible to ensure that incoming freshmen
complete their lower division General Education requirements as early in their college career as
is possible. Students must complete either freshmen English or General Education Math within
48 quarter units. Otherwise, they can only enroll in basic skills courses. Students must complete
all basic skills requirements (defined as General Education basic skills Category A, 12 units)
before accumulating 110 quarter units. Otherwise, they can only enroll in basic skills courses.
Future changes in General Education structure and requirements should be made with the aim
of making all program features clearly understandable to students, faculty, and staff, so as to
reduce advising problems.
Departments/Schools and faculty should take the responsibility for
increasing advising efforts as much possible to ensure that students are
advised effectively about G.E. purposes and requirements.
16. The University General Education Committee shall:
* review all future General Education course proposals in terms of how
well they meet the objectives and criteria provided in Attachment 2 for
the particular subject areas;
* perform a fifth-year review of the General Education program in AY

498

1995-96 to evaluate the organization, courses, criteria, and propose
adjustments or changes that are deemed necessary to preserve the
consistency, quality and coherence of the overall program. Thereafter,
a five-year review cycle will be permanently instituted, reviewing
Category B in the first year, Category C in the second year, Category
D in the third year, all remaining Categories in the fourth year, and a
review of the overall program in the fifth year. (The next five-year
review process shall begin in the 1996-97 academic year.)
* review and reevaluate the criteria themselves for each area of the
program at least once every five years and propose adjustments or
changes that are deemed necessary to preserve the consistency,
quality and coherence of the overall program; and
* monitor the number of electives approved by the several colleges
(particularly in the Integrative Capstone Categories) in order to
discourage excessive and unwieldy course proliferation, using the
number of existing courses from a specific college in a particular
category or section as a factor when considering additional course
proposals from that college and monitoring existing courses to see that
they are offered at least once every other year.
17. The Faculty Senate endorses the use of block enrollment – sequentially enrolling defined
groups of students in two or more courses -- for the purpose of nurturing "student learning
communities" which can increase academic performance and retention. The Senate
Encourages
* experimentation with block enrollment in G.E. courses by
departments/schools and University Studies; and
* evaluation of the effectiveness of block enrollment for the purpose of
determining the potential for its broader adoption within general
education, where feasible and appropriate for departments/schools.
18. All courses in a General Education category or categories under review in a given academic
year must submit complete review materials as specified by the General Education Committee
in order to be recertified as G.E. courses. Failure to submit a complete set of materials for a
course will be grounds for denying its recertification. The General Education Committee will
forward to the Faculty Senate a list of courses for which the Committee recommends
recertification.
19. The Faculty Senate go on record as opposing excessive course proliferation in the General
Education program--although no specific limits on the number of courses in the Integrative
Capstone categories are being presented at this time--in order to ensure the consistency,
quality and coherence of the overall program, and to avoid unnecessary duplication in the use of
resources.
20. The various colleges and the administration strongly encourage and support faculty in the
development of new courses for the General Education program, particularly in the Elective
Options and Integrative Capstone categories and that they encourage and support teaching

499

arrangements that facilitate instructional arrangements between departments/schools and
colleges.
21. Courses proposed by the colleges of Education and Business and Public Administration are
appropriate for the General Education program provided that they meet
* all relevant criteria for the G.E. category for which they are proposed;
and
* contribute to student understanding of modern social, political, and
economic institutions or to lifelong human development in a way which
cannot be met by other colleges, as a result of the unique skills of the
disciplines within the colleges of Education and Business and Public
Administration.
22. For purposes of developing and instituting an outcomes assessment program for general
education courses, a subcommittee of the General Education committee shall be formed as
soon as possible in AY 1996- 97, and shall present recommendations for instituting outcomes
assessment in G.E. as soon as feasible, but no later than the end of AY 1997-98.
23. The overall policy guidelines shall include Attachment 1, the specific criteria for all General
Education courses in Attachment 2, the modification of the U.S. History, Constitution, State and
Local Government requirement described in Attachment 3, and recommendations 1-7 and 9-16
of the June, 1996 General Education committee report on G.E. revision.
Attachment 1: The Revised General Education Program
Program Requirements: 82 Quarter Units

Program

#

BASIC SKILLS CATEGORY
Courses should be completed before a student reaches
Upper Division Standing. For Upper Division Transfer
students, this category should be completed within the first
32 quarter units taken at CSUSB.

12

Written Communication

(4)

Oral Communication

(4)

Mathematics: One course listed in the Mathematics Section
of the Natural Breadth Area.

(4)

Critical Thinking

(4)

500

Units

NATURAL SCIENCES BREADTH AREA

20

Mathematics

(4)

Life Sciences

(5)

Physical Sciences (a six-unit class is allowed)

(5)

Special Topics in Science and Technology

(2)

Integrative Capstone in the Natural Sciences

(4)

HUMANITIES BREADTH AREA

20

Arts

(4)

Literature

(4)

Foreign Language or Literature in Translation

(4)

Philosophy

(4)

Integrative Capstone in the Humanities

(4)

SOCIAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES BREADTH
AREA

20

American History and Civilization*

(4)

American Institutions*

(4)

*The American History, Constitution, State and Local
Government requirement may be met by taking one
course in each of these sections designated as
meeting this requirement. If this requirement is met
by exam, students must still complete 16 lower
division units in this breadth area.
World Cultures

(4)

World Cultures

(4)

Integrative Capstone -- Social and Behavioral Science

(4)

LIFELONG UNDERSTANDING CATEGORY

6

The Whole Person: Physical and Physiological Issues

(2)

The Whole Person: Social and Psychological Issues

(2)

501

Physical Education

(2)

UPPER DIVISION WRITING REQUIREMENT Category
This requirement can be met by passing a proficiency exam
or by taking an upper division expository writing course
offered by any of the colleges. Students passing the
proficiency exam may use the four units as free electives.

(0-4)

MULTICULTURAL/GENDER REQUIREMENTS Category
All students must take one upper division course
designated as meeting this requirement. The
multicultural/gender requirement can be met either by taking
an appropriate Integrative Capstone course in one of the
three breadth areas above or by taking one upper division
course from a list of approved courses (list open to all
colleges).
Attachment 2: Objectives and Criteria for Courses Meeting General Education
Requirements
One of the most serious problems with many general education programs is the lack of
coherence, consistency, and clear cut guidelines for what courses are appropriate for inclusion
in the program and for the content of those courses that are within it. The following objectives
and criteria are designed to provide the guidelines needed for a substantive General Education
program at California State University, San Bernardino. It is intended that the criteria be
stringently applied, that the program be reviewed in a regular cyclical manner, and that limits be
placed on the number of courses included in order that the package does not become so
unwieldy that it is diffuse, unfocused and difficult for students, their advisors, university
evaluators and community college counselors to fathom.
Quality, simplicity and clarity should be the hallmarks of this program. It is expected that
the various provisions of the program will indicate this University's goal:
a. to give our students a strong foundation in basic skills and a stimulating introduction to
the breadth of the liberal arts and sciences;
b. to convey to our students that this G.E. program is a series of building blocks, with the
basic skills core as the foundation for the breadth courses and with the integrative
capstones as the culmination and integration of those breadth requirements;
c. to provide opportunities for all colleges within the University to participate in all
categories in the general education program in which their faculty have expertise;
d. to highlight the Lifelong Understanding objective of the General Education Program by
including appropriate physical education courses for students of all ages and needs;

502

e. to encourage more creative course offerings and teaching arrangements, particularly
across disciplines; and
f. to state forthrightly that we recognize the increasingly multicultural nature of American
society (and California in particular) and the equal place of women in society and that we
recognize our obligation to provide, in our basic General Education Program, courses
and course materials which will give all our students a foundation for understanding the
experiences of ethnic minorities and the diverse roles and experiences of men and
women.
A. Objectives of the Basic Skills Category
Basic skills in composition, oral communication, critical thinking, and mathematics are needed to
express ideas easily and effectively, to understand and utilize quantitative data, and to think
clearly in everyday settings. All basic skills courses have mutually reinforcing objectives to
ensure that these skills are practiced and refined in many different contexts. Classes in
composition, oral communication, and critical thinking have been specifically designed for the
small class size format in order to maximize the exchange of ideas among the students and
between students and instructors.
1. Criteria for the Written Communication Section
Courses meeting this requirement should teach students how to:
a. Use writing as a tool for critical thinking: that is, for formulating thoughtful responses to
reading material and for exploring one's own ideas;
b. Discover and then develop a controlling idea for each essay assignment;
c. Recognize that writing is an on-going process of evaluation and revision. In other
words, be able to show the willingness and ability to accept feedback from others (both
students and teachers), give critiques, and engage seriously in substantive revisions;
d. Synthesize the basic structures of writing; that is, compose intelligible sentences,
arrange them in coherent paragraphs, and organize paragraphs within a developed
essay;
e. Write essays, both in and out of class, that are free of serious error in grammar,
organization, and style;
f. Demonstrate the ability to write coherently in a variety of rhetorical modes, from
narration/description to definition and analysis, etc.;

503

g. Develop a personal style of writing that communicates one's own ideas and emotions
clearly to specific and diverse audiences;
h. Use the library to aid in the discovery of ideas and their incorporation in essays; in
particular, use the card and computer catalogues, periodical indices, and reference
collections to find relevant materials; plan strategies for evaluating the quality of
materials that one has found; and coordinate these materials within the framework of a
properly annotated research paper.
2. Criteria for the Oral Communication Section
Courses meeting this requirement should teach students how to:
a. Understand the roles of oral communication in Western culture;
b. Understand the basic rhetorical elements of oral communication,
particularly audience analysis;
c. Find and use effective supporting evidence for persuasion and
argumentation;
d. Organize main and subordinate ideas in original oral messages;
e. Use effective verbal and nonverbal delivery techniques;
f. Give effective, informative, and persuasive speeches;
g. Listen critically to the speeches of others;
h. Develop self-confidence in a variety of public communication settings.
3. Criteria for the Mathematics Section
After successfully completing the mathematics component of the general education
program, the student should have acquired substantive skills in quantitative and
abstract reasoning in the use of mathematics as a computational and analytical tool.
These skills are important for an individual to function as an effective member of a
technological society. They are essential skills for success in other course work in the
natural sciences. The quantitative and abstract reasoning skills will be helpful
throughout the entire general education program.
a. Beginning Skills. The student is required to demonstrate competency in
beginning mathematics skills by obtaining a passing score on the Entry
Level Mathematics (ELM) exam. Failure to take this exam within two

504

quarters of admission will lead to administrative probation, which may
lead to disqualification from future attendance. This exam assesses
competency in the beginning skills of:
i. arithmetic;
ii. elementary algebra;
iii. elementary geometry.
Appropriate pre-collegiate remedial mathematics courses or tutorial-type
assistance programs are available for students failing this exam. Such remedial
course work does not satisfy a general education requirement.
b. Intermediate Skills. Students are expected to demonstrate knowledge of
intermediate skills in mathematics by obtaining a suitable score on a
placement test administered by the Department of Mathematics. To
obtain a suitable score, the student must demonstrate competency in:
i. solving linear and quadratic equations;
ii. solving linear and quadratic inequalities;
iii. using algebraic fractions and rational equations;
iv. using exponents, radicals and radical equations; and
v. applying the above concepts to solving word problems.
Appropriate pre-collegiate remedial mathematics courses or tutorial-type
assistance programs are available for students failing this exam. Such remedial
course work does not satisfy a general education requirement.
c. College Skills. To satisfy the general education requirement for the acquisition of
college skills in mathematics, the student completes a course listed in the Mathematics
Section of the Natural Sciences Breadth Area. Such courses shall assume
mastery of and build upon the beginning and intermediate skills that are acquired as a
part of a pre-collegiate preparation or remedial instruction. Based on the student's
interests, academic goals, and score on a placement exam, four options are available for
instruction in college-level skills in mathematics:
i. Ideas of Mathematics. The objectives of a course in this option are to
acquaint the nonspecialist with areas of mathematics which illustrate
interesting applications and to develop quantitative reasoning skills.
Topics will be chosen from finite or discrete mathematics.
ii. Introduction to College Mathematics. The goals of a course in this option
are to sharpen mathematical skills introduced in high school, introduce
more advanced topics, and provide applications. Topics will be chosen
from college algebra.

505

iii. Advanced College Algebra and Analytic Geometry. The goals of courses in
this option are to sharpen mathematical skills introduced in high
school, introduce more advanced topics, and provide
applications. Topics will be chosen from advanced college algebra,
analytic geometry, and trigonometry.
iv. Calculus. Here the close connection between algebra and geometry is studied
from an analytic point of view.
4. Criteria for the Critical Thinking Section
Courses meeting this requirement should teach students how to:
a. Identify, analyze, evaluate and present oral and written arguments;
b. Distinguish fact from judgment, belief from knowledge;
c. Identify and understand common fallacies (such as, but not limited
to, straw man arguments, false dilemma, and appeal to authority);
d. Recognize common techniques of persuasion and propaganda;
e. Understand how cause is determined, including the limitations of
correlational evidence;
f. Apply skills of critical thinking to everyday life as well as to course
related assignments.
B. Objectives for the Natural Sciences Breadth Area
In the last three centuries, and especially over the past 100 years, there has been an
explosive expansion within the scientific and technological areas of human knowledge.
These areas have grown to become an integral and essential part of our modern
culture. The overall goal of General Education within the Natural Sciences is to assist
the student in understanding the tools and methodologies of the natural sciences, in
learning some of the most important results of scientific inquiry, and in becoming
conversant with the major consequences of scientific and technological developments.
Each natural sciences lower division breadth course must satisfy the criteria within the
appropriate section of the breadth area.
1. In addition, each natural sciences lower division breadth course must satisfy the
following general criteria:

506

a. Provide instruction in the use of the scientific method, including
hypothesis, observation, experimentation, and deductive reasoning
as applied within the natural sciences area;
b. Explore the philosophical presuppositions and examine the social
and historical context of scientific developments within the natural
sciences; and
c. Provide reinforcement for the fundamental computational skills
taught in the Mathematics Section and, where appropriate, for the
other basic skills of written and oral communication, and critical
thinking
2. Criteria for the Life Sciences Section
Life Sciences courses shall emphasize a knowledge of the life forms in nature, the rules
governing their ecology, the experimental basis for current knowledge and future
exploration in the Life Sciences area, and the impact of scientific and technological
developments on the biosphere.
a. These courses shall be at the introductory level and provide a
breadth of knowledge concerning a major area in the life sciences.
b. Each course shall include a three-hour laboratory experience
reinforcing the experimental basis for scientific inquiry in the life
sciences. These laboratories shall be integrated with the lecture
material and provide exposure to the usual techniques and
apparatus of the life sciences.
3. Criteria for the Physical Sciences Section
Physical Sciences courses shall provide instruction in the fundamental rules governing
matter in the universe, the methodology by which these rules are studied, and the
consequences of the scientific and technological development of the physical sciences.
a. These courses shall be at an introductory level, provide a breadth
of knowledge concerning a major area in the physical sciences, and
incorporate supportive facts and concepts from the other major
areas in the physical sciences.
b. Each course shall include a three-hour laboratory experience
reinforcing the experimental basis for scientific inquiry in the
physical sciences. These laboratories shall be integrated with the
lecture material and provide exposure to the usual techniques and
apparatus of the physical sciences.
4. Criteria for the Special Topics in Science and Technology
The goal of this section will be to create an awareness of the importance of the natural
sciences to a modern technological society through the examination of an important
current issue from a perspective that relates scientific principles to the societal impact of

507

the problems under examination.
a. Courses meeting this objective shall be in a small
lecture/discussion format with laboratory optional. Each course
shall deal with a case study of a current scientific, health-related, or
technological issue relevant to the natural sciences. The issue
must have substantial societal impact. An issue that is primarily of
theoretical interest will not be appropriate. Suitable topics might
include, among others, the biology of sexually transmitted
diseases, consumer chemistry, technology and environmental
pollution, computer-based technology, societal uses of nuclear
technology, and the exploration, colonization and industrialization
of space.
b. Courses meeting this objective will examine the impact of the
specific issue on society, the important principles in the natural
sciences underlying that particular issue, the societal and historical
context of the issue, and the dependence of society on scientific
and technological developments as they relate to the issue being
studied.
c. Where appropriate, such courses shall consider the impact of the
issue under discussion on minorities and on the roles, conditions
and experiences of men and women.
C. Objectives for the Humanities Breadth Area
The principal objectives of the Humanities courses are to expand students' understanding and
appreciation of the arts, literature, and philosophical inquiry as well as to cultivate imagination
and nurture empathy.
1. In addition, such courses should:
a. Exhibit a representative sample of the forms and subjects of art,
expression, and thought within particular disciplines (while
courses in the major often concentrate on one or two genres
and/or topics, Humanities General Education courses must
present a broader sampling of creative production and strive to
balance breadth and substance);
b. Acquaint students with some of the standard techniques of
analysis and appreciation in one or more disciplines of the
Humanities, demonstrating that what people see is largely
determined by how they see it;
c. Attempt to put the "text" in context by helping students to see that
art and expression are productions of people in social and
cultural settings, thereby providing insights into the contextual
structure within which culture develops and thrives;
d. Introduce students to the complexity and relativity of Western culture by

508

i. attending to gender issues and/or the role of minority groups within
various cultures, and/or
ii. Taking a comparativist approach to Western and non-Western cultures
in order to illustrate the ways in which cultural achievements are related
to
race, class, sex, region and epoch;
e. Encourage students both to differentiate and to integrate objective and
subjective responses to art, philosophy, and expression, thus nurturing
in students an appreciation of the varieties--and degrees--of "quality"
and distinguishing between empathy and sentiment, genius and
dexterity;
f. Nurture an openness to the new and unfamiliar, demonstrate the
relationship of past achievements and present culture, and thereby
illustrate both the on-going processes of cultures and the lifelong
relevance of the humanities;
g. Help students to see the disciplines within the humanities as keys not
just to academic knowledge--to abstract contexts, networks, and
methodologies--but to self-knowledge as well. This end can be achieved
through (a) readings, discussions, and written/oral assignments that
compel students to examine the nature of their own empathy and their
knowledge of others; and (b) a sequence of readings, discussions, and
assignments that encourage students to assess, during the course of
the term, not just what they have learned but also how this learning has
affected their preconceptions and values; and
h. Reinforce, where appropriate, the basic skills of composition, oral
communication, and critical thinking.
2. Criteria for the Arts Section
Courses meeting the Arts requirement should, in addition to the above general
humanities objectives:
a. Introduce students to the fine arts (particularly some combination of painting,
architecture, sculpture, and photography) or to one of the performing arts (theater, music
or dance);
b. Concentrate on analytical skills and methods of appreciation and not on the
acquisition of artistic techniques in "studio" experiences (although such acquisition can
be a component); and

509

c. Define and analyze the visual, aural, and plastic qualities--as well as the
instruments and methods of composition/construction--that distinguish media in the Arts
from Letters and Philosophy.
3. Criteria for the Literature Section
Courses meeting this requirement ought NOT to concentrate substantially on syntactical
forms or skills of composition. In addition, they should NOT emphasize the acquisition of
the techniques of "creative writing," although these subjects can be subordinate
components of these courses. Rather, these courses ought, in addition to the basic
humanities objectives, to focus on analytical skills and methods of appreciation AND
meet the following three criteria:
a. Provide a basic typology of forms and genres within the particular field of study;
b. Introduce students to the elemental and compound parts of the forms and genres as
well as the standard critical terminologies for analyzing and describing them; and
c. Analyze the works within an appropriate context of cultural ideas and values, giving
particular attention to the development of that cultural context and its influence on those
works over an extended period of time.
4. Criteria for the Foreign Language/Foreign Literature in Translation Section
Students may select which they wish to take--a course on foreign literature in translation
or a course in a foreign language, and that language may either be a new one or the
one in which they have accumulated two years of high college "seat time." Whichever
choice is made, the intent is to ensure that all students have some experience at their
undergraduate level with either foreign language or foreign culture.
Language classes will be available for students with different competency levels, and
those levels will be determined by entrance examinations to be developed. Introductory
courses will be offered for those wishing to begin a new language. Intermediate
language courses will be available for those passing the language entrance exams at
appropriate levels for such courses.
a. Introductory language classes will focus on the acquisition of language skills through
pronunciation, grammar, composition and conversation and will be exempt from Criteria
1 and 2 under the objectives for the humanities breadth area, but must include a
cultural component; and
b. Intermediate language classes will concentrate on culture and/or literature and refine
skills in grammar, composition and conversation.
i. Literature-oriented classes should conform to the basic criteria for the

510

literature section described above: that is, focus on basic
analytical skills and methods of appreciation and the basic typology of
forms and genres;
ii. Courses focusing more on culture, or combination of culture and literature,
should either incorporate, as appropriate, the criteria for the arts
section described above, or concentrate on the intellectual history
of the artistic and cultural forms under consideration;
OR
iii. Courses may introduce students who already possess intermediate level
language skills to the application of a foreign language within particular
social and economic contexts, such as the media, commerce and technology.
c. Courses on Foreign Literature in Translation should meet the criteria for the Literature section
described Above.
5. Criteria for the Philosophy Section
Courses meeting this requirement should, along with the other humanities objectives,
introduce students to a variety of the classical problems in epistemology, metaphysics,
social/political philosophy, aesthetics, values and language.
6. HUMANITIES INTERDISCIPLINARY COURSES WILL BE CLASSIFIED UNDER ONE OR
MORE OF THE ABOVE THREE SECTIONS, AS IS DEEMED APPROPRIATE according to the
subject matter.
Such courses within the General Education program should conform to the basic Humanities
objectives AND treat the content, analytical skills, and methods of appreciation of at least two of
the following disciplines: theater, fine arts, music, dance, communication, English, foreign
language, and philosophy. This interdisciplinary alternative is designed specifically to encourage
departments/schools to contribute personnel and intellectual support to subjects such as film.
D. Objectives for the Social and Behavioral Sciences Breadth Area
The Social and Behavioral Sciences embrace a wide variety of disciplines. Collectively,
therefore, the courses included in this area embrace a broad number of principal and
secondary goals. The inter-wovenness of these fields and their uniquenesses are
essential concerns that students need to understand as well as the relative usefulness
of each discipline in analyzing and responding to individual, social, economic, political
and cultural institutions and problems. Such breadth is viewed as indispensable
knowledge for educated persons who will function within--and indeed provide the future
leadership for--a society that continues to be increasingly technological, complex,
racially and ethnically diverse, and evolving in terms of the roles of men and women.

511

1. Principally, these courses are designed to enhance students' understanding of
a. the nature and inter-relatedness of social, political, economic and cultural institutions
and behaviors;
b. the complexity and diversity of institutions, cultures, and human behavior in various
civilizations;
c. the values and cultures shaping human behavior and various societies;
d. the historical and contemporary developments that have shaped and are shaping
human behaviors;
e. the nature of contemporary social problems, the forces shaping them, and possible
avenues for coping with and/or solving them;
f. the inextricable association of the many racial, religious, nationality and regional
groups that comprise the American nation;
g. the evolving roles of men and women (and the changing attitudes towards human
sexuality); and
h. the myriad contributions of both men and women to the development of culture,
values and institutions.
2. Secondarily, the courses in the breadth area are intended to acquaint students with the
nature of the diverse disciplines in terms of the themes, theories, methodologies, and modes of
thought, inquiry, analysis, research, and application which they share and which they
individually and distinctively use.
3. It is also recognized that, in pursuing these primary and secondary general education goals,
ALL social and behavioral sciences G.E. courses share the university- wide responsibility to
further the development of student skills in oral communication, writing, and quantitative and
critical modes of thought.
4. Criteria for the American History and Civilization and the American Institutions Sections
In so far as it is appropriate and practicable, courses meeting the American History and
Civilization and the American Institutions requirements should:
a. Introduce students to the concepts, theories, and modes of thought and analysis
necessary for understanding the particular social science approaches used to present
American history, institutions and civilization;

512

b. Provide a balance between breadth and substance on a level appropriate for general
education students--in other words NOT be so narrowly defined and discipline-oriented
as to be designed primarily for those in the major;
c. Include materials on the roles and contributions of men and women and relevant
issues and problems that have been and/or are related to the factor of gender;
d. Include materials on the diverse ethnic groups that have affected (and/or been
affected by) the development of American society, culture, and institutions as well as
relevant issues and problems that have been and/or are related to the factor of ethnicity;
e. Where the time frame of the course is appropriate, relate historical developments to
contemporary conditions, issues and problems; and
f. Depending upon the discipline perspective of the particular course offered under
American Institutions, explore various social, political and economic institutions in
American society and culture, including their origins, interrelationships, historical and
contemporary roles, and impact on American development.
g. In addition, where the courses in American History and Civilization include various
materials that satisfactorily meet the American History and Constitution requirements as
specified in Sec. 40404 of Title V, they shall be so designated; those American
Institutions courses that include materials that satisfactorily meet the Constitution, State
and Local Government requirements of Title V will be so designated. (Some overlap is
inevitable where one has history and political science courses that must all deal with the
constitution and constitutional issues.)
5. Criteria for the World Cultures Section
Courses designed to meet this requirement should:
a. Introduce students to the concepts, theories and modes of analysis
necessary for understanding diverse aspects of world cultures;
b. Provide a balance between breadth and substance on a level
appropriate for general education students;
c. Present an international perspective that places the evolution of either
Western civilization or non-Western civilization within the context of
larger world developments (e.g. cultures, societies, institutions, gender
roles, etc.);
d. Include materials on the diverse racial, religious and cultural groups that
have affected (and/or have been affected by) the development of
Western civilization and/or non-Western civilizations; e. Incorporate
materials on the roles and contributions of men and women and
relevant issues and problems that have been and/or are related to the
factor of gender; and
f. Where the time frame of the course is appropriate, relate historical

513

developments to contemporary conditions, issues, and problems.
6. Criteria for the Discipline Perspectives Section
Courses meeting the Discipline Perspectives requirement should:
a. Introduce students to the concepts, theories, methodologies, and
modes of thought, inquiry, research, analysis and application
necessary for understanding the orientation and focus of that
discipline--without so narrowly defining the scope of the course
as to fail to provide the balance between breadth and substance
appropriate for general education students (Thus, courses
designed exclusively as an introduction to the major are NOT
suitable for this section.);
b. Acquaint students with
i. the history of intellectual thought that
has directly influenced the development
of the particular discipline;
ii. the types of data used and the
processes for collecting and analyzing
such data on social and behavioral
sciences phenomena;
iii. where feasible and appropriate, the
ways in which quantification and
statistical methods are used in the
social and behavioral sciences;
iv. the differences between scientific
methods and the role of value
judgments in the analysis of social
issues;
v. the interrelationship of the particular
discipline with the other social and
behavioral sciences; and
vi. the actual and potential role of the
social and behavioral sciences in
dealing with contemporary issues.
c. Include, from the perspective of the particular discipline,
materials on the roles and contributions of men and women
and relevant issues and problems that have been and/or are
related to the factor of gender; and
d. Incorporate, from the perspective of the discipline, materials on
diverse ethnic and/or cultural groups, particularly in terms of

514

the ways they have affected, and been affected by, the
developments of their respective societies, cultures, and
institutions, and on contemporary issues involving diverse
groups in this and/or other societies.
E. Objectives for the Lifelong Understanding Category
The Lifelong Understanding component stresses the importance of students
understanding the human being as an integrated psychological, social and physiological
organism. In particular, attention should be given to such issues as human sexuality,
human behavior, nutrition, health, components of physical fitness, physiological
functions of the body during exercise, stress, the relationship of people to their
environment, and matters of death and dying. Providing this requirement of one course
of physical activity and two courses that focus on a selective exploration of the
interconnectedness of the many facets of the whole being addresses most directly the
conviction that physical activity and an understanding and appreciation of the integral
place of people's physical and mental well-being in their overall education ought not to
be limited to persons of any particular age--or even of any particular physical condition.
Therefore,
1. Physical activity courses should introduce students to skills that can be
utilized throughout their life and which contribute to the development of the
total person;
2. Activity courses and courses dealing with physical and physiological issues
should provide information on the values, merits and components of
selected fitness programs;
3. Special activity programs and course work alternatives to activity classes
shall be available to students with special needs;
4. Courses on the whole person should focus on aspects of people's lifestyles,
living conditions, and environments that interact to affect their whole
condition, their sense of well-being, levels of stress, nutrition, and the
relationship between their behavior, activity and performance in daily life,
with one course focusing on physical and physiological issues and one
5. Courses on the whole person should also, where appropriate, cover gender
and ethnic/racial differences in terms of how the various factors of nutrition,
exercise, physical and social environment, stress, etc., affect individuals and
their responses to those factors.
F. Objectives for the Integrative Capstone Courses

515

The integrated learning intended with these courses is to provide students with an
understanding of the interrelationships among disciplines and their applications to
contemporary complex environments. Such courses will integrate, develop, and explore
the implications of the skills and knowledge acquired in the lower division courses, in
effect providing a culminating experience in each college by building upon that
knowledge and those skills taught in the lower division General Education courses. In
so doing, as with the upper division electives, the Integrative Capstone courses are
expected to provide a higher level of analysis than lower division courses. More
specifically, these Integrative Capstone courses should also:
1. Be at the upper division level and in the large-lecture format, except when
small classes are needed for off-campus offerings;
2. Extend, apply and integrate skills and knowledge gained in the basic skills
and one or more of the lower division breadth areas, with prerequisites
limited to the relevant basic skills or breadth courses required within the
General Education program;
3. Be interdisciplinary, integrating knowledge across disciplines within and
across the breadth areas, and placing each area in the broader context of
human thought and social development (The cross-listing of such courses
could also be done, but all must be classified within at least one of the three
breadth areas.);
4. Consider possible arrangements in clusters for thematic purposes, with the
understanding that students must still meet the requirement of completing
one such course in each of the three breadth areas. (Capstone courses may
also be designated as meeting the Multicultural/Gender requirement.);
5. Avoid the narrowness and specificity more appropriate to advanced courses
in the program of a major, but, on the other hand, consider innovative
directions and subject matter not easily included in the lower division
courses;
6. Where appropriate to the specific theme, incorporate multicultural and/or
international issues from a comparative perspective that goes beyond a
single country, culture or social system;
7. Where appropriate, also include perspectives on human behavior, gender
roles, and human sexuality as they relate to the theme topic, for example,
either the impact of these on that topic or vice versa;
8. Where appropriate, consider technological and organizational developments
in relation to the theme topic; and

516

9. While breadth, integration of knowledge and skills, and topic areas that go
beyond the scope of traditional courses or disciplines are key objectives for
these courses, each school may determine the extent to which it wants its
integrative Capstone courses to more specifically expand upon what has
been taught in its lower division courses. For example, Natural Sciences
courses are expected to broaden students' knowledge of fundamental laws,
theories, and facts that comprise our understanding of the contemporary
physical world, of the origins of scientific discovery, and the implications of
scientific and technological developments.
G. Objectives for the Multicultural/Gender Category
California is a society on the Pacific Rim, rooted in the West and facing East--a bridge between
Western and non-Western worlds. More and more we are becoming a society with a leadership
made up truly of men as well as women, a society where non-whites will soon comprise the
majority. Students educated in California should recognize the contributions to knowledge and
civilization that have been made by members of various cultural groups. Well rounded,
educated individuals NEED to possess an appreciation and understanding of the multicultural
richness of American society, the dynamics of the interaction between such diverse cultural
groups, the international dimensions of American ethnic life, and the destructive impact of
stereotyping, racism, and discrimination as well as the evolving roles of men and women within
the larger socio- cultural matrix. The "invisibility" of minorities and women in many segments of
American life needs to be understood if it is ever to be eradicated.
While all G.E. courses are to consider such materials where appropriate, this will not be
sufficient to ensure for all students some in-depth exposure to these subject matters. A
requirement that includes courses specifically focusing on some combination of multiculturalism
and gender will provide this needed in-depth analysis on these subjects. Important, too, is the
fact that such a requirement also makes a statement about what this university recognizes as
important in its students' education. Therefore, the broad integration of such course materials
and the provision for a separate course requirement are complementary. The flexibility in terms
of the specific content of the courses meeting this requirement (viz., more multicultural or more
gender oriented, or an equal focus on both) will provide students with a variety of choices.
Courses approved for this requirement should principally have a contemporary emphasis that
includes materials on several American ethnic groups (defined by race, religion, or nationality)
AND on gender, OR provide a focus on the evolution of those groups and issues. (Identifiable
regional groups might also be included.) Individual courses may emphasize different (and even
changing) combinations of groups or focus on gender more than on ethnicity, but both
components SHALL be essential parts of all courses designated as meeting this requirement.
All such courses shall also share in the university-wide responsibility to further the development
of student skills in oral communication, writing, and critical thinking.
1. Criteria for Multicultural/Gender Courses

517

Courses designed to meet the upper division multicultural/gender requirement should
also:
a. Specify the particular emphasis of the course in terms of multiculturalism or gender,
that is, which will be the primary focus and which the secondary one (or if both are to be
treated equally);
b. Indicate what particular discipline approaches are being used in this course and how
they particularly contribute to an understanding of multiculturalism and gender issues in
contemporary American society--bearing in mind that the Upper Division Electives and
Integrative Capstone courses are intended to be cumulative, integrative, and particularly
the Integrative Capstones, interdisciplinary;
c. Define the concepts of culture and ethnicity and identify at least some of the different
approaches to defining those terms-and similarly with respect to gender;
d. MULTICULTURAL FOCUSED COURSES should describe and analyze the values,
cultures, and various institutions of the selected ethnic groups in terms of:
i. How they function within or affect the lifestyle of the p articular groups and
the sex roles of men and women within those groups;
ii. How they relate to or compare one with the other;
iii. How they compare with parallel values, culture, and institutions within
the dominant society;
iv. How they have influenced the cultural development of the respective groups
and contributed to the cultural (and perhaps institutional) development of
American civilization; and
v. Present issues and problems that relate to the historical experience of
the selected ethnic groups, to their current conditions and concerns in
American society and to the particular experiences, conditions, and concerns of
men and women within those ethnic groups and, by comparison, with the larger
society.
e. GENDER FOCUSED COURSES should, while not excluding the
factor of multiculturalism, relate their issues and problems more
to:
i. Human sexuality and gender roles (particularly as they reflect
contemporary developments), and

518

ii. The experiences and perspectives of women and men and the issues
of gender (such as those that are health related, economic, physiological,
etc.) as well as the extent to which those conditions and concerns exist
among women and men in selected ethnic groups; and
f. HUMANITIES OR LITERATURE FOCUSED COURSES should
explore the relationship of those works either to the culture, values,
institutions and contemporary issues and concerns of the selected
American ethnic groups or to gender related issues and concerns in
contemporary American society (recognizing that components of
both are EXPECTED but that the particular emphases may vary
from course to course).

Attachment 3:American History, Constitution, and State & Local Government
Requirement
Students must meet the American History, Constitution, and State & Local Government
requirement in Title 5 either by completing at least TWO approved courses or by
passing proficiency exams in these areas. No one course shall be accepted as meeting
all of these requirements.
Students may complete this requirement by taking two courses approved as fulfilling the
components of this requirement from among those in the first and second sections of
the Social and Behavioral Sciences Breadth Area (one in American History &
Civilization and one in American Institutions), or other courses designated in the
University Catalog as meeting portions of this requirement. However, students who
meet this requirement, or any portion of it, by exam will still be required to select and
complete sixteen units of lower division work in the Social and Behavioral Sciences
Breadth Area.

FAM 840.4 POLICY ON GRADES
FAM 840.4 Policy on Grades

As part of their teaching responsibilities, faculty members must evaluate the academic
performance of their students. All courses, except those designated otherwise, follow an
ABCDF grading system. Evaluations in a particular class must be in accord with the grading
system designated for that class. The award and change of grades is the sole prerogative of the
faculty member.
At the beginning of each course, normally on the syllabus, faculty members should indicate

519

clearly the procedures by which students will be evaluated and grades will be assigned. These
procedures should be followed in a fair and equitable manner. The grade assigned by the
instructor of record is to be considered final. That grade may be changed only for a compelling
reason, such as instructor or clerical error, or demonstrated prejudice or capriciousness. (See
the information on Grade/Academic Grievance Procedures provided below.) To change a grade,
the faculty member must complete an official Change of Grade Report and submit it for review,
action and filing to the appropriate department chair/school director or program coordinator
and to the college dean or designee.
Description of Grades
The grade symbols used at the university are as follows:
Grade symbol

Performance level

Grade points per quarter hour

A
AB+
B
BC+
C
C
D+
D
OF
CR
NC

Excellent

4.0
3.7
3.3
3.0
2.7
2.3
2.0
-1.7
1.3
1.0
.7
.0

Good

Satisfactory

Passing
Failing
Credit
No Credit

Grade point averages are computed by dividing the number of grade points earned by the
number of GPA units. Only units and grade points earned by a student while enrolled at this
university are used to compute the resident grade point average. Grades from courses
numbered 1-99 are not computed in this Average.
The following administrative grades carry no grade points and are, therefore, not used to
determine a student's grade point average. However,itshouldbepointedoutthattheIncomplete will
be counted as an “F" if not removed within one calendar year from the date it was assigned.
CBE
RD
SP
W
WU

Credit by Examination
Report Delayed
SatisfactoryProgress
Withdrawal
Withdrawal Unauthorized

520

The administrative grade of"WU" carries no grade points but is included in determining
units attempted. Thus, it is equivalent to an "F".
CBE
RD
SP
W
WU

Credit byExamination
Report Delayed
Satisfactory Progress
Withdrawal
Withdrawal Unauthorized

Incomplete (Authorized)

The administrative grade of "WU" carries no grade points but is included in determining
unites attempted. Thus, it is equivalent to an "F".
Expanded Grade Symbol Definitions
A (Excellent): Meeting course requirements with a superior level of performance.A is
recognized to be an honors evaluation.
B (Good): Meeting course requirements with a high level of performance.
C (Satisfactory): Meeting course requirements with an acceptable performance.
A gradeofC- may be accepted for transfer credits for courses covered under
Executive Order 1100 (revised August 23, 2017).
D (Passing): Meeting course requirements with minimally adequate performance.
F (Failing):Inadequate Performance Or Not Meeting Course requirements.CR(Credit): A
satisfactory or better level of performance, equivalent to the grade of "C" (2.0)orbetter,
has been demonstrated in meeting course objectives. For graduate courses, equivalent to grade
of "B" (3.0) or better.
NC (No Credit): Performance at an unsatisfactory or failing level, equivalent to a grade
of "C-" (1.7) or less. For graduate courses, equivalent to a grade of less than "B" (3.0).
Does not award credit for the course or affect grade point average.
CBE(Credit by Exam): This symbol indicates that a student has successfully passed a
course through an examination. It is not included in the calculation of grade point averages.
A student Matriculated through regular enrollment may petition to receive course credit by
examination with the department concerned before the first day of classes of the term in which
the course is offered. The student must complete the examination within the first two weeks of
the term. The student must be currently enrolled in courses other than the one(s) to be
challenged. No fee is charged for these examinations.

521

A student who passes an examination is given the grade CBE for that course. This symbol
indicates that a student has successfully passed a course through examination. It is not
included in the calculation of grade point averages. No official record is made of failures in these
examinations. Exact times and places of the examination are announced by the departments.
Students who wish to take an examination should consult with the department office well in
advance.
I (Incomplete): The grade ofIncomplete should be reserved for students who have completed
the majority of the required coursework and who can present adequate justification for needing
additional time to complete the remainder. It is the responsibility of the student to bring pertinent
information to the instructor and to reach agreement on the means by which the remaining
course requirements will be satisfied. A final grade is assigned when the work agreed upon has
been completed and evaluated. An Incomplete must be made up within one calendar year
immediately following the end of the term in which it was assigned. This limitation prevails
whether or not the student maintains continuous enrollment. Failure to complete the assigned
work will result in an Incomplete being counted as equivalent to an "F" (or an "NC" if applicable)
for grade point average computation. Note: In some instances the instructor may have indicated
on the Incomplete Form a grade to be assigned in the eventuality that the remaining course
work is not completed. Students may not receive an "I" grade in any applicable degree course
for the term in which their graduation check is filed. Students will be required to refile their grad
check for the term in which the outstanding requirements are fulfilled.
RD (Report Delayed): The RD symbol is used in those cases where a delay in the reporting of a
grade is due to circumstances beyond the control of the student. The symbol is assigned by the
Office of the Registrar and is replaced by a more appropriate grading symbol as soon as
possible. An RD is not included in the calculation of grade point averages.
SP (Satisfactory Progress): The SP symbol is used in connection with courses which extend
beyond academic term.The symbol indicates that work in Progress Has been evaluated as
satisfactory to date but that the assignment of a precise grade must await the completion of
additional course work. Cumulative enrollment in units attempted may not exceed the total
number applicable to the student's educational objective. All undergraduate work is to be
completed within the time specified but not to exceed one calendar year of the term of first
enrollment, and a final grade will be assigned to all segments of the course on the basis of
overall quality. Extension of any time period requirespriorauthorizationbytheDean of
Undergraduate Studies. The time limitation for graduate degree theses may be up to two years
but may not exceed the overall time limit for completion of all master's degree requirements.
Students may not receive an"SP" grade in any applicable degree course for the term in which
their graduation check is filed. Students will be required to re-file their grad check for the term in
which the outstanding requirements are fulfilled.
W (Withdrawal): This symbol indicates that the student officially dropped the course. It carries

522

no connotation of quality of performance and is not used in calculating grade point average.
WU (Withdrawal Unauthorized): The symbol "WU" shall be used where a student does not
officially withdraw from a course but fails to complete it. Possible indicators that faculty may use
To make this determination are: more than one week of non-attendance without notification to
the instructor, failure to complete a significant portion of the coursework required date, and/or
non-participation in a significant number of class activities. For purposes of grade point average,
this symbol is equivalent to an "F".
Grade/Academic Grievance Procedures
Students and faculty may obtain information concerning grades grievances and other academic
grievances from the Office of Undergraduate Studies. Generally, a grade grievance must be
initiated by the student within no more than 40 calendar days after the grade is recorded. The
complete policy statement is available at the Office of the Dean of Undergraduate Studies, or
the Offices of the College Deans.
Information Concerning Non academic matters may be obtained from the Office of the Vice
President for Student Affairs, the Women's Resource Center, the Adult Re-Entry Center, the
Cross-Cultural Center, Vice Presidents' offices, and college Deans' offices. A grievance or
complaint must be filed within no more than 40 calendar days after the students learned or
reasonably should have learned of the occurrence of the grievance/complaint event.

FAM 840.72 POLICY ON FACULTY POSTING AND DISTRIBUTION OF STUDENT
GRADES
FAM 840.72 Student Grade Posting Policy
The Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) requires colleges an universities to
maintain the confidentiality of student records. As such, FERP effectively mandates that
practices connected with posting student grades or providing grades to students via telephone,
mail (postal or electronically) ensure confidentiality. In addition, FERPA prohibits parental rights
to inspect a student’s education records at the postsecondary level. Records may be released
to parents only under the following circumstances (1) through the written consent of the student,
(2) in compliance with a subpoena or (3) by producing a copy of the most recent Federal
Income Tax form showing that the students were claimed as a dependent. Grades include
exams, projects, activities, or other assignments that contain points or letters that reflect
students’ performance.
Guidelines

523

Some faculty members may prefer to either openly post or send grades to students upon their
request. While this policy does not prohibit such practice, it sets forth guidelines that must be
strictly followed in order to meet the confidentiality requirements of FERPA.
Posting of Grades in a Publicly Accessible Place
The public posting of grades by student names, identification numbers or social security
numbers (or any part of these numbers) is a violation of FERPA. Similarly, the “open
distribution” of graded assignment (e.g., a box outside a faculty member’s office or other
procedures that provide access to graded assignments by others) is a violation of FERPA. This
is also applicable to providing one student’s grade or graded assignment to another individual
without written permission.
FERPA allows the posting of grades provided that the posting protects the confidentiality of
each student’s name and grade. A unique identifier other than a Social Security Number or a
Student Identification Number, known only to the student and the faculty member, must be used
for posting in a publicly accessible place. Do not use an ordered list such as published class
roster or similar alphabetical list that can be traceable to their names for posting grades. It is
recommended that a secure learning management system such as blackboard be used for
posting grades.

Mailing Grades
FERPA does not prohibit the mailing of grades to students if requested by the student. Similar to
the policy for openly posting grades in a publicly accessible place, the grades may be mailed to
the student (postal or electronically) provided that it is addressed only to the student. Faculty
members should ensure that mailing addresses are correct by asking students for a selfaddressed envelope (not post cards, which are subject to “access” by others). Faculty may only
respond to a student's CSUSB assigned email address for grade distribution to ensure that no
one else can have access to the grade. Questions regarding legitimate procedures should be
addressed to AVP of Academic Programs.

FAM 841.3
GRADUATE STUDENT ADMISSIONS POLICY
FAM 841.3 Graduate Student Admissions Policy.pdf
Purpose and Scope
The minimum GPA requirements for graduate student admission are mandated by Title 5,
Division 5, Chapter 1, Subchapter 3, of the California Code of Regulations (a GPA of 2.5 overall
or in the last 90 quarter units). This policy brings the CSUSB graduate GPA admission

524

requirement in line with Title 5 while at the same time allowing individual The
Department/School/Program the authority to set their own requirement above what is stipulated
in Title 5.
Policy Statement
In accordance with Title 5, the minimum GPA requirement for admission to post baccalaureate
study at California State University, San Bernardino is 2.5 overall or in the last 90 quarter units
or 60 semester units.
The minimum requirements for admission to post baccalaureate study, including GPA, are fully
elaborated in the University Bulletin of Courses. As described in the University Bulletin,
admission to a graduate program is the purview of the Department/School/Program to which the
student is applying and may require a minimum GPA for admission above 2.5. The
Department/School/Program also has the authority to set other criteria in addition to GPA.
Approved by the Faculty Senate on: 2/5/9
Approved by the President on:
5/23/17
First created by Graduate Council on in 2012
Revised by Graduate Council, Month 2018

FAM 841.4 COLLEGE OF EXTENDED LEARNING FOR CERTAIN
ZERO-UNIT GRADUATE COURSES
FAM 841.4 College of Extended Learning for Certain Zero-Unit Graduate Courses
Continuous Enrollment: Graduate students who have completed all other coursework will be
allowed to enroll, with department consent, for zero-unit continuous enrollment courses through
the College of Extended Learning (CEL). Graduate students enrolled in continuous enrollment
courses in this way shall retain the privileges of regularly matriculated students: access to email,
library, learning management systems, and faculty.
Comprehensive Examination: Graduate students who have completed all other coursework will
be allowed to enroll, with department consent, for the comprehensive examination through the
College of Extended Learning (CEL).
Graduate students enrolled in the comprehensive exam in this way shall retain the privileges of
regularly matriculated students: access to email, library, learning management systems, and
faculty.

525

Graduate Portfolio: Graduate students will be allowed to enroll, with department consent, for the
graduate portfolio through the College of Extended Learning (CEL) if the credit amount for this
course is zero-unit. Graduate students enrolled in the graduate portfolio in this way shall retain
the privileges of regularly matriculated students: access to email, library, learning management
systems, and faculty.
Rationale:
In 2013-14, the Graduate Council proposed that graduate students who have completed all of
their program requirements except for the culminating project and are taking the zero- unit
courses, Continuous Enrollment and Comprehensive Examination, be permitted to enroll, with
department consent, for those courses through the College of Extended Learning, which would
allow them to pay very much less for those courses than stateside fees for 0-6 units.
At that time, students were required to enroll in Continuous Enrollment in order to retain
privileges (email, library, learning management systems, faculty, catalog rights), but were being
required to pay regular 0-6 unit tuition. Many students, rather than paying this amount of money,
chose to take a leave of absence instead. Leaves of absence, however, can cause the following
problems: (1) during a leave of absence, students lose access and thus have a harder time
working on their projects; (2) students often do not return after a leave of absence and fail to
finish the degree; (3) students must go through a plethora of paperwork to leave the university
and then re-enroll. Similarly, students who were going to take the Comprehensive Exam would
often, in order to speed their time to graduation and to avoid paying regular tuition for the zerounit comprehensive exam, enroll in comprehensive exam courses while they were still
taking coursework, even though they are strongly encouraged not to do so. Allowing students to
enroll in very much less expensive CEL courses would make it practical for programs to require
students to complete all coursework before taking the exam. The Graduate Council’s proposals
were approved by the Faculty Senate and by the President in Spring 2014 and thus became
University policy. Since then, the Graduate Council has become aware that, in some programs,
graduate students are required to enroll in a zero-unit graduate portfolio course while they are
still taking courses, creating additional pressure, or after having completed their coursework
and before being able to address the graduate exit writing requirement. This policy change
would make it practical for programs to require students to complete all coursework before
developing their portfolio.

526

FAM 841.33 COYOTE ACCELERATED POST-BACCALAUREATE
EDUCATION (CAPE)
BLENDED PROGRAMS POLICY
FAM 841.33 Blended Programs Policy (CAPE)

Table of Contents
Table of Contents 1
Purpose and Scope 1
Definition 2
Policy Statement 2
Procedure and Process 10
Approvals 17
History 17
Purpose and Scope
In July 2022, the CSU Board of Trustees voted to amend Title 5 to permit students to double
count a maximum of 12 units of graduate level coursework towards their bachelor's and
master's degrees. This allows CSU campuses to offer “Blended” programs that merge an
existing bachelor's and master's degree program into a single pathway. A blended program
allows the student to transition directly from undergraduate standing (bachelor's) to graduate
standing (master's) without having to apply to the graduate program. These programs have
increased access to graduate study, grown graduate programs, and reduced the time and cost
to students for obtaining the two degrees.
Existing CSUSB bachelor's and master's degree programs may elect but are not required to
create blended programs. The CSU's Policy on Blended Bachelor's and Master's Degree
Programs establishes systemwide minimum processes and requirements for the creation and
implementation of blended programs, and states that issues not addressed in that policy shall
be determined at the campus level. This CSUSB policy describes the requirements and
procedures through which existing CSUSB bachelor's and master's degree programs can
implement blended programs. Blended programs at CSUSB must meet all applicable CSU
policies and state and federal laws.
Authority to grant post-baccalaureate and graduate special-action admission is provided under
Title 5 section 41001: An applicant who does not qualify for admission under the provisions of
subdivisions (a) or (b), or both such subdivisions, of Section 41000, may be admitted by special
action if, on the basis of acceptable evidence, the applicant is judged by appropriate campus
authority to possess sufficient academic, professional and other potential pertinent to the
applicant's educational objectives to merit such action.

527

The bachelor's and master's degree will typically be offered in the same support mode.
However, if the bachelor's is in state support and the master's in self-support the campus will
need to (1) clearly identify when the student completes the state support bachelor's degree, (2)
begin to charge self-support tuition only for those graduate units that do not count towards the
state support bachelor's degree, and, (3) clearly notify the students of the differences between
the state and self-support programs including, at minimum, the impact on tuition and financial
aid.
Definition
Blended Program: “Blended” programs merge an existing baccalaureate and master's degree
program offered in the same support mode in similar disciplines into a single pathway. In
Blended Programs, a minimum of 138 semester units are required to earn both degrees.
Students are awarded the bachelor's degree when they satisfy the degree requirements for the
degree; and students are awarded the master's degree when they satisfy the degree
requirements for that degree. Coyote Accelerated Post-Baccalaureate Education (CAPE) is the
unique name given to blended programs at CSUSB.
Policy Statement
1. Required Criteria to Implement Blended Programs
a. For consideration for a new blended program, the bachelor's and master's program
must already be approved programs. If the undergraduate and graduate programs are
not in the same department, the proposal must include evidence and agreement of
terms by both department chairs.
b. The courses that will fulfill both the graduate and undergraduate degree requirements
(12 units) must be 5000-level (approved for graduate level credit) or 6000-level courses.
Each double counted course shall be specifically identified in the program catalog. All
identified double counted courses are required (students cannot pick from a menu of
courses to double count). It is up to each blended program to limit the number of 5000level and/or 6000-level courses that can be applied to a blended degree program
according to university requirements.
c. A minimum of 138 units are required for the blended program, which includes 120
units minimum for the undergraduate degree, 30 units for the graduate degree, and 12
units double counted between the two degrees.
d. In the case of courses that have variable unit loads or that can be repeated for degree
credit, the number of course units allowed to be counted towards the graduate degree
should be specified. The maximum repeatable units need to be maintained for each
degree (bachelor's and master's) in the blended program.

528

e. While in undergraduate status, a student in a blended program will take graduate-level
courses required for the master's degree. For units that are double counted, none of the
required graduate courses can be replaced by an undergraduate course, and graduate
courses that will also count toward the bachelor's degree must either require mastery of
the more rudimentary knowledge taught at the undergraduate level or cover the content
of the undergraduate courses that they replace. Justification for each double counted
course must be provided in the proposal, ensuring that this is the case.
f. Every new blended degree program requires its own proposal through the curricular
process. In the case of programs with concentrations, every concentration must have a
different blended degree pathway that specifies the courses that can double count for
each concentration (roadmaps are required for each concentration included in the
blended program).
g. Once a blended program is created, changes to the blended program must be made
through a program change. Visit the CSUSB Academic Programs website for more
information on program changes.

2. Considerations for Developing Blended Programs
a. With blended programs, more students who are in undergraduate status will be taking
graduate courses. On the other hand, fewer students in graduate status will be in the
courses that are double counted. There may be conversations at the department level
on the timing of course offerings and how that will impact enrollment.
b. If the double counted course is a 5000-level course, the blended student must do the
extra work required for graduate students in the course.
c. A blended program can alter the constitution of cohort-based master's programs, as
some introductory courses in the master's program may not have all cohort-members
taking the courses.
d. A blended program may impact accreditation, so it is important to consider the
implications.
e. If the master's program is either hybrid or online modality, students need to be aware
of the different course modality in the graduate program (this should be indicated in the
catalog entry).
f. If the unit count of the master's program is above 30 units, then the unit count may
present a barrier.

529

g. Unlike concurrent degree programs, new CSU degree codes will not be assigned for
the blended bachelor's and master's programs.
h. To ensure that enrollments are reported accurately, the campus is required to notify
Academic Programs in the Chancellor's Office signaling an intention to implement the
planned blended program. The resultant Chancellor's Office software edits will allow
accurate reporting in the CSU Enrollment Reporting System (ERS), without receiving an
"error" message. The blended programs will also be added to the CSU Degrees
Database.
i. Students in blended programs must be designated as "Academic Plan Code_Degree
Designation_B." Corresponding codes must be determined by the Office of the Registrar
and shall be assigned for ERS reporting at the time the student begins and is maintained
during the component undergraduate and graduate degree programs.
j. While students in regular, non-blended, baccalaureate and graduate programs have a
degree objective code that ranges from digits "2" to "7," students in blended programs
have only the digit "9" as their degree objective code. This code should be assigned for
ERS reporting at the time the student begins and is maintained during the component
undergraduate and graduate degree programs.
k. When a blended-program student has earned the undergraduate degree, the campus
will change the student designation to graduate. When a blended-program student has
earned the undergraduate degree, the campus will change the student level code to "5,"
signifying graduate standing.
l. Blended bachelor's and master's degree programs will continue to use the existing
CSU degree program codes and Classification of Instructional Programs (CIP) codes for
their components.
3. Tuition
a. The cost of attending California State University, San Bernardino, consists of paying
the state fees (also known as resident tuition fees) and university campus-based fees.
Non-resident tuition may also apply to out- of-state students as well as international
students. If courses are dropped, students may be responsible for retained charges of
prorated fees based on the number of days enrolled in the school term.
b. Tuition Fees are not calculated on a per-unit basis. Enrollment and tuition costs are
either Part-Time (0-6 units) or Full-Time (6.1+ units). If a student is not a resident of
California, an additional fee for each unit enrolled is added to registration and tuition
fees. (The additional fee for non-residents in AY 2023-2024 is $396.00 but may change
in subsequent years.) Once the transition to graduate status is made, students will be
considered as post-baccalaureate for tuition.

530

c. A student will be assessed the undergraduate tuition and fees only during the time in
which the blended-program student is designated as an undergraduate.
d. When the degree-objective status is changed to "graduate," the student will be
assessed the graduate student tuition and fees.
e. Students in a blended bachelor's degree program who are completing units that will
double count toward a master's degree that has been authorized to assess a fee for a
graduate professional degree (e.g., graduate business professional fee) may or may not
be charged that tuition fee for the double counted units, at the discretion of the blended
program as indicated on the program's B-Form. The fee shall be charged to students
after they transition to graduate status.
f. If a student in a blended program opts not to complete the master's program but does
complete the undergraduate degree requirements, undergraduate matriculation shall be
reopened in order to grant the baccalaureate degree. There shall be no related cost to
the student and no refund of previous graduate fees paid.
4. Financial Aid
a. If students transition between undergraduate and graduate standing during the
academic year, they should reach out to the Financial Aid Office to determine if
adjustment paperwork is appropriate and allowable.
b. Students should complete the FAFSA or California Dream Act application annually
with the correct status listed (i.e., undergraduate or graduate). As with all graduate
students, students in blended programs will have different funding eligibility when they
are in graduate status.
c. Students will be funded with financial aid funds as undergraduate students while they
are coded as undergraduate students and enrolled in courses applicable to their
undergraduate degree.
d. While coded as an undergraduate student, the student will not be funded for graduate
coursework beyond the 12 units that can be double counted.
e. Once the student is coded as a graduate student, their financial aid will be adjusted to
graduate level funding.
f. Funding for the summer term is limited. Winter term financial aid is not available.
g. To maintain financial aid, students should be aware of changing Satisfactory
Academic Progress (SAP) requirements when moving from undergraduate to
graduate status.

531

5. International Students and Blended Programs
a. Each campus must issue a change of educational level (i.e., I-20 status) when an F-1
student in a blended program becomes a graduate student according to visa regulations.
Undergraduate blended program students will shift to graduate status when they have
completed 120 semester units. The international student office should be consulted to
work out the timing and workflow for issuance of the new I-20 to F-1 students in blended
programs.
b. International students with F-1 visas are permitted post-completion OPT for up to 12
months (and additional 24 months with STEM OPT extension) per degree level. Unless
the campus determines that a gap between educational levels is permitted to allow for
OPT, students will otherwise become ineligible for bachelor's level post-completion OPT
upon the date of their change in educational level to graduate student status, as
indicated on the I-20. Students would still be eligible to apply for graduate level postcompletion OPT and STEM OPT extension.
6. Advising Structures in Blended Programs: Option 1 and Option 2
a. Option 1: Each student in a blended program will obtain tenure-track faculty
sponsorship in the degree program. That faculty sponsor will be responsible for advising
the blended program student they sponsor.
b. Option 2: Each blended program will appoint their own blended advisor to advise
current blended program students.
7. Advisor Responsibilities in Blended Programs
a. Familiarity with all blended program policies and procedures at CSUSB, including
semester deadlines.
b. Familiarity with the requirements for their department's blended degree program. At
maximum, blended programs will allow for 12 units of double-counted coursework
between the undergraduate and graduate degrees.
c. Attending a meeting once per semester for blended program advisors at CSUSB
(hosted by Graduate Studies).
d. Advising of blended program students.
e. Program admissions, including submitting the form to admit a student to the blended
program based on program admission criteria. Graduate Studies can conduct GPA
evaluations as needed.

532

f. Submitting the transition form to move the student from undergraduate to graduate
status.
g. Completing the off-ramp form when a student wants to leave or is no longer eligible
for the blended program.
h. Close coordination with other advisors, Graduate Studies, and other CSUSB
personnel as needed for blended program students.
i. For international students, close coordination with International Students & Scholars
(ISS).
j. Consistently reminding participating students to visit their assigned ASUA advisor
regularly to ensure proper progress for their General Education and major requirements.
k. Consulting with the designated administrator for advisor training needs at the
undergraduate level, i.e. how to post advising notes in EAB.
l. Programs should share some of these responsibilities among faculty and staff, such as
for program recruiting and prospective blended program advising, but the blended
advisor should be aware of these efforts and coordinate the blended program activities.
8. Forms and Procedures in Blended Program Advising
a. Blended Program PAWS
b. Admission to Blended Program form (Undergraduate to Undergraduate Blended)
c. Transition to graduate standing form (Undergraduate Blended to Graduate Blended)
d. Change of major (to discontinue the blended student and return them to the major)
e. How to submit EAB Notes and use EAB advising tools
9. The Blended Program Life-Cycle and the Advisor
a. Submit the blended program admission form to admit students. Note: If the student had any
PAWS exceptions prior to admission to the blended program, those will carry over automatically
to the new blended PAWS.
b. Submit the form for transition to graduate standing in the semester during which a student will
complete 120 units. Note that students must also have completed their GE and lower division
requirements.

533

c. For a Fall transition to the graduate program, the form must be submitted by March 1. For a
Spring transition to the graduate program, the form must be submitted by October 1.
d. For international students, coordinate with ISS as the student changes their
status. ISS will provide guidance on how to update the student's I-20.
e. Students should be transitioned to the graduate record and be monitored for
graduation each semester by the graduate program coordinator until their
degree is completed.
10. Blended Program Off-Ramps
a. A student in undergraduate status may decide not to continue in the blended program. In this
case, the student can request a change of major through the normal process and the student is
returned to their undergraduate degree program. The student may later apply to the program's
graduate degree. The advisor provides guidance to the student to see their ASUA academic
advisor for completion of their bachelor's degree. If units are transferred into a future master's
degree at CSUSB, units cannot exceed seven years, unless approved for validation by both the
academic program and Provost Designee for Graduate Studies.
b. If a student in undergraduate status goes on Academic Notice, the student is automatically
transitioned back into the undergraduate major. The student may later apply to the program's
graduate degree, but double counting units will not be possible. ASUA designee must
communicate the transition back to the undergraduate major to the Office of the Registrar.
c. If a student in graduate status goes on Academic Notice, the student must clear their status
through the same policies that apply to graduate students. Graduate Studies will put relevant
advising materials and contacts on their webpage for advisors to access.
Procedure and Process
11. Procedures for Creating Blended Programs
a. Initial consultation: Contact the Office of Graduate Studies for a consultation. Program
requirements will be discussed. Campus guidance for developing a blended program will
be reviewed.
b. Checklist: Be sure you understand the following requirements; you must meet this
checklist before submitting your blended program proposal.
i. Existing bachelor's and master's degrees: You must have BOTH an existing
baccalaureate degree program AND an existing graduate degree program to
blend. If the undergraduate and graduate programs are not in the same

534

department, the proposal must include evidence of agreement on the curriculum
and roadmaps by both department chairs.
ii. Modality: By default, the modality will be the modality of the existing
baccalaureate and graduate programs.
iii. Double-counting 12 units: Decide which specific 12 units will count for both the
bachelor's and the master's degrees. These units may include 5000-level
courses approved for graduate credit or 6000-level courses. All double counted
courses must be required for all blended students. A program can choose less
than 12 units to double count. iv. Update the P-Form: Update the P-Form for both
the bachelor's and master's degrees to indicate the blended program is offered.
In the P-Forms, link to the department website that contains blended program
requirements for admission and completion.
v. B-Form (See attached): Complete the B-Form including two roadmaps. The BForm will be located in the bachelor's P-Form. Link to the B-Form from the CIM in
the bachelor's P-Form. You must create two roadmaps within the B-Form: 1) a
five-year roadmap for first-year students (FYS), and 2) a three-year roadmap for
upper-division transfers (UDT). The B-Form is accessible on the Academic
Programs website for viewing before completing it in the CIM.
vi. CIM: With the above checklist and initial consultation complete, you are ready
to launch your proposal. Log into the CIM and update the P-Form. The B-Form
will auto-populate when you select the blended program option in the bachelor's
P-Form.
vii. Visit the CSUSB Academic Programs website for general information on PForm approval processes.
c. Following University approval of a blended program, the Office of Academic Programs
is responsible for submitting the blended program to the Chancellor's Office for final
approval and authorization. Approval from the Chancellor's Office must be obtained prior
to implementing a blended degree program. WSCUC approval is not required.
12. Procedures for Admission to Blended Programs
a. Eligibility: Students are eligible to enter the blended program if they meet the
following conditions:
i. Completion of a minimum of 60 units but not more than 120 units
ii. Not currently in the semester in which they will complete the baccalaureate
degree
iii. Completion of at least 12 upper-division course units in-residence

535

iv. At least a 2.5 cumulative GPA
v. Faculty sponsorship or blended program advisor approval
vi. Programs can determine admission requirements that are more stringent than
these university standards. For example, the program can set a higher GPA
threshold or require minimum grades in specific courses. Each department and
program can determine the specific courses or additional requirements (if any)
that must be completed in the major prior to entering or applying to the blended
program. These will be outlined in the catalog for the blended program.
vii. Changes to these requirements will be made by a program change.
viii. Transfer students and international students are eligible, pending they meet
eligibility criteria, including having completed 12 upper-level course units inresidence. It should be noted that international students must be enrolled in
mostly in-person courses. Master's programs with mostly online courses may not
be options for international students.
ix. Departments shall publish their admissions requirements. Departments can
move a student to the blended program (undergrad major to blended
undergraduate) at any time. However, the department can implement their own
timeline for admitting undergraduate students for blended programs.
b. Application Form: Students can apply for admissions into blended programs during
the semester they are completing the eligibility requirements. Application deadlines are
at the discretion of the department.
c. Application Process
i. Departments can establish their own process and materials needed to review
candidates for the blended program. However, at minimum, the student must
have a cumulative 2.5 GPA and a tenure-track faculty sponsor or approval of the
blended program faculty advisor depending on advising structure (see section 6).
ii. Departments may decide to review applications on a rolling basis or have an
internal established timeline for receiving applications.
iii. Application forms should be signed by (1) the faculty sponsor or blended
program faculty advisor, (2) department chair, and (3) the student, indicating that
all department level requirements for entry into the blended program (except
confirmation of GPA) have been met.

536

iv. The applicant will submit the signed application form to Graduate Studies
Admissions.
v. Submission of transcripts is not necessary as Graduate Studies Admissions
has access to all CSUSB student transcripts on file.
vi. Graduate Studies will evaluate the GPA. If the GPA falls below the minimum
requirement for the blended program, Graduate Studies Admissions will notify
the faculty sponsor or blended program faculty advisor, department chair, and
the student that the applicant does not meet GPA requirements for admission to
the blended program.
vii. If the applicant meets the GPA requirement for the blended program,
Graduate Studies will initiate the process of entry into the blended program.
viii. No fee is assessed for the blended program application process.
d. Entering the Blended Program: Once an applicant has been accepted into the
blended (undergraduate) program, the following steps will be taken.
i. Graduate Studies initiate the form for Blended Program Entry (undergraduate
major to undergraduate blended major) and route it to the faculty sponsor or
blended program faculty advisor, the department chair, and the student. Once all
signatures are obtained, Graduate Studies will route the Blended Program Entry
form to the Office of the Registrar. The Student will be coded in PeopleSoft as
"Academic Plan Code_Degree Designation_B."
ii. The Office of the Registrar moves the student into the blended undergraduate
program (similar to a major change).
iii. Notification of the new blended student is sent to the faculty sponsor,
International Students & Scholars (ISS), Student File, Financial Aid, Registration
& Records, and Graduate Studies. ISS and Financial Aid will separately track
blended students. Please direct any blended students with F-1 visa status and
Optional Practical Training (OPT) to ISS for additional guidance.
13. Transition to Graduate Study
a. Once the student is eligible for transitioning to the blended graduate program, the
faculty sponsor or the blended program faculty advisor will request that the student
transition to the blended graduate program via an Adobe Sign form. The blended student
does not apply to the graduate program through Cal State Apply.
b. Eligibility requirements for transitioning to graduate status:

537

i. The form for transition to graduate status is initiated by the term before the
conferral of the undergraduate degree, including in-progress units.
ii. The student is in good academic standing in their undergraduate program.
iii. The student maintains a 3.0 GPA in graduate level courses taken while in
undergraduate status.
iv. The Office of the Registrar will evaluate the student record for these
requirements before advancing them to graduate status. If the student does not
meet these requirements, the student will be moved back into the appropriate
undergraduate major.
v. Blended students do not pay an enrollment deposit when transitioning to
graduate status. Transitions to graduate status only occur in Fall or Spring
semesters and must be requested by the deadline the semester before
transitioning.
vi. Students are evaluated for honors based on the undergraduate degree.
c. International Students Transition to Graduate Status
i. International students who are moving to graduate status need to have
completed all graduation requirements for the bachelor's degree for International
Students and Scholars (ISS) to issue an updated Form I-20 reflecting change to
graduate status.
ii. International students who do not meet this requirement will be moved back
into the appropriate undergraduate major.
iii. All programs that international students enter must be approved on the SEVIS
list.
iv. If the student meets eligibility, ISS issues an updated Form I-20 for change of
educational level (i.e., changing level from bachelor's to master's). This change
will shift the minimum unit requirement for F-1 undergraduate student status (12
units) to that for a graduate student (9 units, unless other full course load is
defined by college or academic department).
v. International students with an F-1 visa are permitted post-completion Optional
Practical Training (OPT) for up to 12 months (and additional 24 months with
STEM OPT extension) per degree level.

538

vi. Unless the campus determines that a gap between educational levels is
permitted to allow for OPT, students will otherwise become ineligible for
bachelor's level post-completion OPT upon the date of their change in
educational level to graduate student status, as indicated on the I-20. Students
would still be eligible to apply for graduate level post-completion OPT and STEM
OPT extension.
d. Deadlines: For a Fall transition to graduate status, the transition form must be
submitted by the faculty sponsor or blended program advisor by March 1. For a Spring
transition to the graduate program, the form must be submitted by the blended advisor
by October 1.
e. Workflow: The workflow for the transition to graduate status impacts several offices on
campus. The review of each blended student will follow the process below.
i. The faculty sponsor or blended program advisor identifies which students need
to transition to graduate status and initiates and signs one form per student. The
blended student signs the form electronically to acknowledge the implications in
financial aid and tuition resulting in the status change, as well as the master's
degree completion time limit.
ii. The Office of the Registrar reviews criteria for entering graduate status. ISS
reviews and issues an updated I-20 for eligible students.
iii. In PeopleSoft, Graduate Studies Admissions adds an application for the
graduate record. The student is then coded in PeopleSoft as "Academic Plan
Code_Degree Objective_B."
iv. The Office of the Registrar discontinues the undergraduate record and
confirms term activation is complete for the graduate record.
v. Copies of the form are sent to all in the workflow plus Financial Aid, Student
Business Services, and Graduate Studies.
14. Graduation and Degree Conferral
a. Blended program students will receive their bachelor's degree once they have
completed the bachelor's degree requirements. They will receive their master's degree
once they have completed the master's degree requirements. Students may participate
in both ceremonies.
b. Bachelor's students' grad checks are initiated by the university. Master's students
must apply for the grad check after they have been advanced to candidacy.

539

c. One of the conditions for the student to be switched into graduate status is to have
already completed an undergraduate grad check.
d. The Office of the Registrar will track the student for graduation requirements as soon
as they enter the graduate record.

FAM 841.36 GRADUATE COUNCIL POLICY
FAM 841.36 Graduate Council Policy

Membership: Two tenured or tenure-track faculty from different departments/schools within
each College will be elected to serve two-year, staggered terms on the Graduate Council. At
least one of the faculty elected from each college shall be a graduate coordinator from that
college. In addition, one representative from a credential program shall be elected by the
College of Education, and one additional representative from each college in which a doctoral
program is housed. One currently registered graduate student shall also be appointed by the
Associated Students. The Dean of Graduate Studies and Associate Provost for Research will
serve as ex-officio members of the committee. The Faculty Senate Chair (or designee) will also
serve as an ex-officio member of this committee. This committee will be chaired by a faculty
member elected by the Council. Graduate Council members are strongly encouraged to hold
regular meetings with the Directors of Graduate Programs in their Colleges.

540

Responsibilities: The Graduate Council is responsible for development and review of all
policies and procedures pertaining to graduate programs. It will also submit an annual
report to the Faculty Senate. Council recommendations concerning these policies and
procedures shall be forwarded to the Faculty Senate Executive Committee for consideration.

FAM 841.97
POLICY ON GRADUATION WRITING ASSESSMENT REQUIREMENT FOR GRADUATE
STUDENTS
FAM 841.97 Graduation Writing Assessment Requirement for Graduate Students.pdf

Purpose and Scope
This document sets forth the policies and procedures for assessing graduate students' writing
proficiency to ensure that they fulfill California State University's Graduation Writing Assessment
Requirement before they are granted a graduate degree.

Definition
1. GWAR: Graduation Writing Assessment Requirement for graduate students.
2. OGS: Office of Graduate Studies.
3. Student: a matriculated student enrolled in a CSUSB master's or doctorate program.
4. The Program: the college, department or program from which the student will receive
the graduate degree.
Policy Statement
The GWAR must be satisfied before a student graduates from the program in which s/he is
enrolled.
The GWAR shall be satisfied by one of the following options.
1. Take a writing intensive course with a grade "B-" or better. The program is required to
obtain the approval of the OGS for this option by submitting to OGS a syllabus of the
course.
2. Obtain an acceptable standardized test score, such as the Analytical Writing subtest
of the
Graduate Management Admissions Test (GMAT) or the Graduate Record Examinations
(GRE). Both the acceptable score and the type of test shall be determined by the
program.

541

3. Complete a program-specific writing intensive course with a grade "B-" or better.
4. Receive a passing score on a rigorous academic paper or papers. The paper(s) shall
be evaluated in the following four areas:
A. Integration/Critical Analysis
B. Content/Organization.
C. Style/Format.
D. Grammar/Usage
The program shall determine how many papers shall be required and who shall
evaluate the paper(s).
5. Complete a writing intensive thesis, comprehensive exam, or culminating project. The
program shall have a remediation mechanism for students who do not satisfy the GWAR
on their first attempt. The program shall specify the maximum number of attempts that
students are allowed to satisfy the GWAR.
The program shall file its GWAR option (1 through 5 above) and remediation mechanism
with the OGS for approval before implementation. The program shall provide the OGS
with annual aggregate student GWAR performance data.
If a student transfers to a different program, the program to which the student is
transferring to has the right to accept or decline the student's GWAR from the previous
program.

FAM 841.97
POLICY ON GRADUATION WRITING ASSESSMENT REQUIREMENT FOR
GRADUATE STUDENTS
FAM 842.5 Honors Progam

Purpose and Scope
This document sets forth the policies and procedures for assessing graduate students' writing

542

proficiency to ensure that they fulfill California State University's Graduation Writing
Assessment Requirement before they are granted a graduate degree.
Definition
1. GWAR: Graduation Writing Assessment Requirement for graduate students.
2. OGS: Office of Graduate Studies.
3. Student: a matriculated student enrolled in a CSUSB master's or doctorate program.
4. The Program: the college, department or program from which the student will receive
the graduate degree.
Policy Statement
The GWAR must be satisfied before a student graduates from the program in which s/he is
enrolled.
The GWAR shall be satisfied by one of the following options.
1. Take a writing intensive course with a grade "B-" or better. The program is required to
obtain the approval of the OGS for this option by submitting to OGS a syllabus of the
course.
2. Obtain an acceptable standardized test score, such as the Analytical Writing subtest
of the
Graduate Management Admissions Test (GMAT) or the Graduate Record Examinations
(GRE). Both the acceptable score and the type of test shall be determined by the
program.
3. Complete a program-specific writing intensive course with a grade "B-" or better.
4. Receive a passing score on a rigorous academic paper or papers. The paper(s) shall
be evaluated in the following four areas:
A. Integration/Critical Analysis
B. Content/Organization.
C. Style/Format.
D. Grammar/Usage
The program shall determine how many papers shall be required and who shall evaluate
the paper(s).
5. Complete a writing intensive thesis, comprehensive exam, or culminating project.

543

The program shall have a remediation mechanism for students who do not satisfy the GWAR on
their first attempt. The program shall specify the maximum number of attempts that students are
allowed to satisfy the GWAR.
The program shall file its GWAR option (1 through 5 above) and remediation mechanism with
the OGS for approval before implementation. The program shall provide the OGS with annual
aggregate student GWAR performance data.
If a student transfers to a different program, the program to which the student is transferring to
has the right to accept or decline the student's GWAR from the previous program.
Approved by the Faculty Senate on
Approved by the President on 5111,c, I I
First created by Graduate Council, 2015
Revised by Graduate Council, February 2019

FAM 842.5
POLICY ON A UNIVERSITY HONORS PROGRAM
FAM 842.5 Honors Progam

1. Preamble
The California State University, San Bernardino is committed to the establishment of an Honors
Program curriculum designed to meet the needs of highly motivated students who seek an
exceptional, intellectually challenging experience. This program will add breadth and depth to
the student's undergraduate course of study. Honors students will be encouraged to take an
active role in their own learning process, to think about problems they will face in creating the
future, and to explore their roles in addressing these problems. Integration of subject material
across the curriculum is a primary goal of the program, as is emphasis on the cognitive
development of the student. Students will be encouraged to develop thinking skills and to use
these skills in analyzing and evaluating problems of contemporary society.
2. The Honors Curriculum
An Honors Program shall be established to supplement, not replace, any existing academic
programs of the University. The program is to be phased in over a four- year period. A detailed
program is provided for the first year and tentative outlines are included for the second, third
and fourth years. The program will accept the first group of students into the first year of the
program for Fall Quarter, 1989.

544

2.1 First Year. During their freshman year in the Honors Program, Honors students will
enroll in a three-quarter integrated basic skills course sequence which will meet the
General Education requirements for basic skills, including communication, composition
and critical thinking. The course sequence will focus upon specific issues and topics and
will teach students basic skills in the process of dealing with these topics. For example,
in dealing with an issue such as balancing economic growth and environmental risks,
students will learn research methods, apply techniques of examining arguments and
evidence, and prepare both written and oral reports.
2.2 Second Year. During their sophomore year, honors students will be expected to
continue to enroll in the lower division Honors seminar each quarter. Additional honorsspecific courses will be developed within the General Education area.
2.3 Third Year. Students will enroll in a sequence of three courses that begin a
multidisciplinary approach to course material. The intention of the third year
courses is to integrate course material across the disciplines.
2.4 Fourth Year. Student will participate in an honors activity. Students will be expected
to work with a faculty member or a team of faculty members. Such work will lead to a
major performance, project or thesis which exhibits exemplary creative activity.
3. Honors Program Committee.
A permanent Honors Program Committee shall be established as a special
committee of the Faculty Senate.
3.1 Membership: This committee shall consist of one representative from each of the
Schools; one representative from the Library; one representative from the Office of the
Dean of Undergraduate Studies, one student representative; and the Director of the
Honors Program. The school and library representatives shall be appointed by the
Executive Committee to two-year staggered terms. The student representative shall be
elected to a one year term from and by the Honors program participants.
3.2 Duties: The Honors Program Committee will serve as a Board of Directors for the
Honors Program.
The Committee's first order of responsibility will be to develop and submit for curriculum
review and approval through regular curricular channels and on appropriate program
and course proposal forms a complete honors program. A final draft of the complete
program (after department- and school-level reviews have been completed) shall be due
in the Office of Academic Programs by December 4, 1989 for technical review prior to
review by the General Education Committee, the Curriculum Committee, and the
Senate. Committee members will act to voice concerns of the separate academic

545

units and to disseminate information from the Committee to the academic and
administrative units. The Committee will be actively involved in program design, course
planning and admissions/retention decisions. In addition, members of the Committee will
be expected to act as advisors and counselors for students in the Honors Program.
The Committee will be actively involved in selecting, evaluating, and recommending the
approval of courses and faculty for the honors program.
4. First-Year Curriculum for 1989-90.
For the 1989-90 school year, honors sections will be scheduled for the currentlyexisting general education courses in English 101, Philosophy 105 and Communication 120.
Enrollment in these sections will be restricted to honors students by withholding the course code
number from the published schedule and noting that the section is restricted to honors students.
In subsequent years, new course titles will be given to the courses in the sequence to
emphasize their integrated nature; for example Humanities 103 or Integrated Studies 103,
sections A, B, and C. These courses will be approved through the normal curricular Channels.
Students will also enroll in a lower division Honors seminar each quarter, 1 credit per quarter (3
credits total). These seminars will emphasize analysis and evaluation of current ideas and
events. The lower division Honors seminars serve two purposes. The first is to solidify the group
of honors students, ease their transition into the University, and establish a group identity. The
second is to provide an intellectual forum in which students may discuss issues, exchange
ideas, present papers and be introduced to research methods. This seminar requirement will
begin when the courses have been approved through the normal curricular channels.
A lower-division Honors seminar (IS 105) will be authorized for one academic year (1989-90)
through this document on a temporary, emergency basis pending approval of the course in
tandem with a complete Honors program through the normal curricular channels.
Last Revision 1989: EC

FAM 845.72
INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW BOARD

Purpose and Scope
The purpose of this document is to provide information of roles and resources for conducting
ethical research involving human participants.
Definitions as defined by the U.S. Department of Health & Human Services
and Office for Human Research Protections:
• Research
• Human [subject] participant

546

• Intervention
• Investigators
Policy Statement
Per federal regulations, the IRB at CSUSB reports directly to the U.S. Department of Health &
Human Services (HSS) and Office for Human Research Protections (OHRP).
All faculty, students, administration, and staff conducting research or data collection involving
human participants must follow the regulations and guidelines set forth by OHRP, Institutional
Review Board (IRB) at CSUSB, and Federal Wide Assurance #FWA00004865 between CSUSB
and OHRP. Prior to starting any research projects, all investigators involved in human
participants research must receive IRB approval by: completing CITI training or other !RBapproved ethics training, submitting an application to the IRB via its online system, and
receiving from the IRB a notice of approval or determination of exemption.

Procedure and Process
IRB Membership
Based on OHRP regulations, the IRB is constituted and its membership includes faculty
members (at least one from each academic college), subject matter experts, student members,
a research compliance officer, and non-CSUSB affiliated members. See updated federal
regulations for membership. The term for faculty representatives is three years and they can
serve no more than three terms.
IRB members will be selected as follows:
1. When a vacancy arises, a call for candidates will be advertised to the relevant unit(s)
(university, colleges, and/or departments). This call will be made by the IRB.
2. Calls for applications will include a link to the IRB website, membership term and
responsibilities, and application due date. Interested candidates will provide their CV or resume
and a short statement of their qualifications in their application. These documents will be initially
reviewed by the IRB Compliance Officer and IRB Chair. The IRB Chair will bring candidates'
materials forward to the IRB for review, discussion, and selection by majority vote.
3. Upon the recommendation of the IRB, formal appointments will be made by the AVP
for Research.

IRB Chair
The IRB Chair is selected by the IRB from among the IRB membership. The selection is
determined by a simple majority vote of the IRB membership. The Chair of the IRB shall serve a
two-year term with an additional year as past-chair (for a total of 3 years). The Chair should be a
current IRB member with at least one full year experience on IRB.

Appeals
547

Under certain circumstances, faculty may appeal the IRB determination for their IRB application.
For more information, please see the IRB site.
Resources
• Questions regarding human participants data collection should be referred to the
Research Compliance Officer of the IRB or the Chair of the IRB, both of whom can be
reached at irb@csusb.edu.
• OHRP regulations
• CSUSB's IRB guidelines
Approvals
Approved by the Faculty Senate on February 8, 2022
Approved by the Provost on March 23, 2022
Approved by the President on March 30, 2022
History
First created: 02/08/2022 [Date] by EPRC _
Revised: [Date] by _
Renumbered: [Date] from to

FAM 847.7
INDEPENDENT STUDY COURSES
FAM 847.7 Independent Study Courses
The College has adopted an academic plan which recognizes that certain students may profit
from the opportunity to carry on studies in depth and in breadth, and achieve intellectual growth
by engaging in specially designed Independent Study courses. These courses are usually
designated Independent Study (commonly numbered 555 or 595). They should not be confused
with regular courses presented as tutorial or community service courses nor substituted for
established courses. Over the past decade these courses have developed in various directions
in a number of areas. In order to maintain the quality of the independent study courses and
provide for some continuity of administration, the following guidelines have been established.
These guidelines have been drawn up to insure certain standards while allowing flexibility for
more specialized needs of individual departments/schools.

Guidelines
1. Students are required to have a minimum overall GPA of 3.0 in order to be eligible to
sign up for independent study.

548

2. Each department/school shall require a written application for independent study. This
will serve as the student's contract. The contract should indicate the student's objectives,
a tentative schedule of student-faculty conferences, the nature of objectives, a tentative
schedule of student-faculty conferences, the nature of the final project and the criteria
upon which the independent study project will be evaluated. A copy of each approved
contract is to be kept in a file in the department/school for at least one academic year.
3. A copy of each student's final independent study project is to be kept in a file in the
department/school for at least one academic year. If placing a copy of the project on file
is not feasible (as with films or productions) this should be indicated on the independent
study contract. These final reports shall be placed in the file when the student's grade for
the course is submitted.
4. It is required that within each department/school, independent study applications be
reviewed and acted on each quarter, prior to registration. The procedure for this review
shall be established by each department/school.
5. As a general rule, a faculty member is expected to devote an average of 1-1/2 hours a
week for each 5 credit independent study student he/she directs. A student taking
independent study is expected to devote 3 hours per week for each unit of independent
study (i.e., a 5-unit independent study should involve approximately 15 hours per week
for a student).
6. Other regulations regarding independent study may be instituted at the department
level as desired by individual department's/school’s needs. In particular, each
department/school should decide how many units of independent study can be counted
as units toward that major, credential or graduate degree.
Recording and Staffing
The faculty workload assignment for Independent Study and other types of supervised
instruction differs from that used for traditional classroom formats. Instead, faculty are assigned
weighted teaching units (WTUs) based upon the number of students supervised, rather than the
number of class meetings each week. Thus faculty supervising students enrolled for 5 or 6
student credit units (SCUs) of Independent Study are assigned .5 WTU per student. 24 such
Independent Study students would constitute a full teaching assignment for one faculty member
for one term. Lesser amounts of SCUs assigned to Independent Study students each
proportionately fewer WTUs for the faculty involved in the supervision. Since Independent Study
is our most expensive instructional mode, the number of class cards available is limited each
term. Their assignment to Colleges and Departments/Schools is the responsibility of the Dean
of Academic Planning, who establishes norms for each instructional format in consultation with
the Director of Institutional Research and the Vice President for Academic Affairs. Each
Department/School offering instruction on an Independent Study basis assumes responsibility
for establishing policies and procedures which insure that student projects are appropriate to the

549

time and SCUs available and that adequate arrangements exist for the supervision and
evaluation of student efforts. As a norm, faculty are expected to spend 1-1/2 hours per week in
preparation for, meeting with or evaluating the work of each supervised student enrolled for 5 or
more SCUs. Every student enrolled for Independent Study should be credited to some faculty
member's workload assignment, preferably the faculty member doing the supervision,
irrespective of the effect on that faculty's reported workload. Each such assignment must be
made within the Department/School in which the student enrolls for Independent Study.
Through the course of the academic year, faculty with greater than 12 unit course loads one
term can be given reduced teaching assignments in a subsequent term within the same
academic year. Or, at the discretion of the Department Chairman/School Director, and with the
knowledge and consent of the College Dean, another faculty member within the same
Department/School can be given a reduction in teaching assignment equal to the course
overloads earned through Independent Study in the same or an The College Dean bears the
responsibility for maintaining, in a clearly auditable fashion, the records of Independent Study
assignments for each Department/School each term. The constraints involved in the procedures
described include the following.
Last Revision: Administrative

FAM 849.8
POLICY ON INSTRUCTIONAL TELEVISION FIXED SERVICE (ITFS)
FAM 849.8 Policy on Instructional Television Fixed Service (ITFS)(REPEALED)

1. Definition and Purpose of ITFS
ITFS provides the electronic transmissions of live interactive classroom instruction. The purpose
of ITFS at CSUSB is to meet more effectively the educational needs of the area by providing
access to regular classroom instruction for people in remote locations or others who are not
able or likely to attend regular classes on campus. ITFS may be used to provide Extended
Education classes, academic advising for remote located students and to carry teleconferences
over the system at remote locations.
2. Faculty Oversight
The Information Services Committee shall formulate, recommend, and review policy concerning
ITFS. Programmatic recommendations will be forwarded to the Dean of Extended Education,
and technical recommendations will be forwarded to the Director of Audio Visual Services. The
Committee's duties shall include reviewing proposed ITFS courses; suggesting criteria for
evaluating ITFS courses; making recommendations regarding instructional support for ITFS
550

courses, including library, audio visual, laboratory and computer resources; making
recommendations regarding services for students enrolled in ITFS classes; and evaluating ITFS
instruction on a continuing basis and making recommendations for improvement.
3. General Guidelines:
3.1 Any course which has been approved as part of the University curriculum, or any
course offered through the office of Extended Education, can be considered for its
appropriateness to be offered via ITFS. The unique instructional format of an ITFS
course requires that it receive review and approval prior to its first offering via ITFS.
Such review shall be made by the department chair, Information Services Committee,
College Curriculum Committee, College Dean, and Dean of Extended Education.
3.2 Courses offered via ITFS shall be adequately supported with library, audio visual,
laboratory, and computer resources as available
3.3 Students enrolled in ITFS courses shall be provided adequate advising, admissions
and registration services. Special efforts shall be made to provide other student services.
3.4 Faculty teaching ITFS courses are encouraged to visit their ITFS students when and
where appropriate but shall not be required to do so. If visits are to be made, faculty
shall be appropriately reimbursed in accordance with standard policies and regulations.
3.5 ITFS courses will be evaluated on the basis of (1) instructor performance measured
through SETE forms and (2) technical quality measured through an Extended Education
assessment form. As with summer session courses, faculty will decide whether SETE
forms will be placed in their personnel files; however, none of the information derived
from the Extended Education technical quality assessment forms shall be placed into
any faculty member's personnel file
3.6 Access to ITFS facilities shall normally be based on the following priorities:1. statesupported regular credit;2. extension credit courses; 3. non-credit courses; 4. academic
advisement; 5. Academic conferences.
3.7 Normally any enrollment for a class offered via ITFS shall be credited to the
department of the faculty member(s) providing the information.
3.8 In the initial phase of implementing the ITFS system or when developing new offcampus courses and programs, an occasion may arise where departments will be
unable to anticipate the staffing required for ITFS sections. In such situations,
departments may request additional WTU's from the Dean of Extended Education.
During the experimental period from Fall 1988 through Spring 1990 up to 4 WTU's
beyond those normally assigned may be awarded for the initial preparation and offering

551

of an ITFS version of a course when justified. Subsequent offerings of an ITFS course
will be staffed from the normal departmental or college budget.
Last Revision 2002: EC [REPEALED]

FAM 852.6 POLICY ON OFFICE HOURS
FAM 852.6 Office Hours

1. Introduction
CSUSB faculty communicate with students in a variety of ways, both face-to-face and
electronically, to provide support for classroom instruction and to offer academic advising and
career counseling. This policy sets forth the minimum requirements of regularly- scheduled
office hours while fully recognizing those other ways of communicating with students as widely
existing and extremely valuable for the success of student learning. Faculty can—and are
indeed encouraged to—offer more than the minimum to the extent possible.
2. Types of Office Hours
2.1. Face-to-face office hours, typically held on campus
2.2. Office hours by appointment, usually held on campus
2.3. Virtual office hours, e.g. communication between the faculty and students in an
online chat room, instant messaging, phone calls, email, or videoconferencing. In this
type of office hours, the physical presence of the faculty on campus is not required.
3. Application of the Policy
The provisions in this policy apply to classes that are designated as “lecture” or “seminar.” They
do not apply to other types such as “independent study,” “supervision,” “lab,” “practice,”
“performance,” or “activity.” Departments may establish office hour policies for these classes as
they deem necessary and appropriate.
4. Number of Office Hours
4.1. Faculty will hold fifteen (15) minutes of office hours per week per credit unit of
coursework
taught for a minimum of one (1) hour.
4.2. In addition to 4.1., “Office hours by appointment” should be provided.

552

4.3. No office hours are required in the finals week.
5. Office Hours with Respect to Modes of Instruction
5.1. For classes in the traditional mode of instruction, face-to-face office hours must be
held in
accordance with 4.1. They should be scheduled at times and on days when targeted
students are normally in attendance or are otherwise available.
If a part-time Lecturer is not provided with an office space to hold face-to-face office
hours, he or she should arrange to be available to students before and after each class
by way of office hours.
5.2. For classes taught in the hybrid mode, a combination of face-to-face office hours
and virtual office hours is expected. The proportion of each type in the combination will
be decided by the department chair in consultation with the faculty member based on the
exact nature of the hybrid mode and other classes the faculty member is teaching in the
term.
5.3. For classes taught fully online, virtual office hours may be held. However, if a fulltime faculty member’s entire teaching load is online in a term, at least one (1) of the total
office hours per week shall be conducted face-to-face. Exceptions to this section of the
policy can be made with agreement of the Department chair in cases where the
instructor cannot come to campus.
6. Communication of Office Hours
Office hours shall be provided to the department office no later than the end of the first week of
instruction each term. Office hours and email address of faculty shall be presented in the
course syllabi, posted outside the faculty member's office, be filed with the Department Chair
and College Dean, and be strictly followed.
7. Cancellation of Office Hours
Cancellation of office hours must be communicated to the department office and students as
soon as possible. A notice of cancellation shall be posted on the faculty member’s door.

FAM 854.34
RESEARCH, SCHOLARLY AND CREATIVE ACTIVITY COMMITTEE
FAM 854.34 Research Scholarly and Creative Activities Committee

553

Purpose and Scope
The California State University, San Bernardino is committed to supporting faculty research,
scholarship, and creative activities.
The Research, Scholarly and Creative Activity Committee of the Faculty Senate shall make
recommendations concerning faculty research, scholarly and creative activities policies, foster
the culture of discovery, and innovation and advocate for faculty research and creative activities.
Sources:
CBA 25.6 (Eligibility to apply for the RSCA funds)
CSU Chancellor’s Office Annual Coded Memorandum: “Research, Scholarship, and Creative
Activity Award Program” (2019)
FAM 036.5 “POLICY STATEMENT CONCERNING RESEARCH, SCHOLARSHIP AND
CREATIVE ACTIVITY GRANTS”
Definitions
Research, Scholarship and Creative Activity (RSCA) funds
CSUSB’s annual allocation of the Chancellor’s Office funds for faculty research and creative
activities, subject to the CBA 25.6.
Mini-grant program
An intramural grant program defined in FAM 036.5, funded by RSCA funds, subject to the CBA.
Summer Research Fellowship program
An intramural grant program defined in FAM 036.5.
Professors Across Borders program
An intramural grant program offered by the Center for International Studies and Programs
(CISP).

Policy Statement
This policy defines the composition and functions of the Research, Scholarly and Creative
Activity Committee.
This policy also describes the procedures for a review of the following intramural grant
programs: the Mini-grant program, the Summer Research Fellowship program, and the
Professors Across Borders program and for the review of the policies concerning faculty
research and creative activities.
Committee Composition

554

Six tenure-track faculty members, one from each College/Library shall be appointed by the
Faculty Senate Executive Committee in consultation with the appropriate Constituent Unit
Election Officers.
1. Faculty members shall serve two-year terms. Terms shall be staggered.
2. The following persons shall serve as ex-officio members of the committee.
a. Associate Provost for Academic Research (AR)
b. Director, Center for International Studies and Programs (CISP)
c. Director, Office of Research Development (ORD)
Functions of the Committee
The Committee shall coordinate all faculty professional development activities, which fall within
the following areas:
1. Receive and review the annual reports for the Mini-grant, Summer Research
Fellowship, and Professors Across Borders programs.
2. Assess the effectiveness of the Mini-grant, Summer Research Fellowship, and
Professors Across Borders programs and procedures, and provide recommendations for
policy and procedure revisions.
3. Coordinate with college Professional Awards Committee chairs to ensure consistent
review of all grant applications.
4. When funds and administrative structures are provided, recommend the distribution of
the allocations among the Summer Research Fellowship and Professors Across Borders
categories.
5. Formulate, assess, and recommend revisions to the policies concerning faculty
research and creative activities.
The recommendations indicated above shall be made to the Faculty Senate, Provost and
President.
Procedures
The procedures apply after the date of formal approval of this policy by the Faculty Senate.
Review and assessment of Mini-grant, Summer Research Fellowship and Professors
across Borders programs.
1. The summary information pertaining to the Mini-grant and Summer Research
Fellowship programs shall be provided by the ORD.

555

2. The summary information pertaining to the Professors Across Borders programs shall
be provided by the CISP.
3. For each project, the summary information shall include the type of award, college,
the title of proposal, author(s), funding amount, and recommendation.
4. The summary data information listed shall be maintained within the Office of
Academic Research.
5. All reports, including final reports for each award, shall be submitted according to the
requirements specified in the call for proposals.
6. The Mini-grant and Summer Research Fellowship awardee names, listed by college,
shall be posted on the ORD website.
Each college Professional Awards Committee (PAC) will use this information to identify
current submissions for professional awards by faculty who have received one or more
previous awards and who have failed to submit final reports.
Those proposals associated with incomplete files from a prior funding cycle or award program
(i.e., proposals without final reports) shall be excluded from the proposals submitted to the
college PAC for review. The Office of Academic Research shall notify authors of proposals
without appropriate documentation that their submissions have been disqualified on this basis.
The call for proposals for each award program shall stipulate that all reports for previous
awards are required in order for a proposal to be given consideration by the college
PAC.
At least every three years, the Research, Scholarly and Creative Activity Committee
shall review the completed grant reports and assess the effectiveness of each program,
i.e. whether each award program is meeting its stated objectives. The committee will use
this information to recommend improvements. The information also may have
implications for eliminating underused award programs and for generating new
categories of funding support for professional growth.
At least every three years, the Research, Scholarly and Creative Activity Committee
shall review the effectiveness of each program administration. The committee will use
this information to recommend changes for improvements.
Reporting Requirements
The Research, Scholarly and Creative Activity Committee shall provide the Faculty
Senate with an annual report on the number of awards, the source of funds, the amount
of funding in each award category, and the distribution of awards by college.

556

Formulating, assessing, and recommending revisions to the policies concerning faculty
research and creative activities.
1. At least every five years the Committee shall review each policy and, after
consultation with the FAC, suggest edits to the appropriate FAM policies, including but
not limited to FAM 036.5, and FAM 854.34.
2. As necessitated by new external or internal regulatory, budgetary, or other factors
affecting faculty research and creative activities, the Committee may formulate and
propose a new policy to address such factors.

Approvals
Approved by the Faculty Senate on __November 23, 2021__
Signed by the President on _________________
History
First created:__________ [Date] by _________________
Renumbered: 2013 from FAM 515 to FAM 854.34

FAM 854.34
POLICY STATEMENT CONCERNING FACULTY
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
FAM 854.34 Faculty Professional Development

1. Preamble: The California State University, San Bernardino is firm in its commitment to
support a comprehensive program of Faculty Professional Development. The program
encourages academic activities related to research, instruction, library projects, development of
grant proposals, creative and other appropriately related work which will assist in helping faculty
members improve their competence as teachers and scholars. To coordinate this program and
assist in its expansion, a Faculty Professional Development Coordinating Committee shall be
organized.
2. Faculty Professional Development Coordinating Committee Composition
2.1 Six tenure-track faculty members, one from each College/Library. These shall be
appointed by the Faculty Senate Executive Committee in consultation with the
appropriate Constituent Unit Election Officers.
2.2 Faculty members shall serve two-year terms. Terms shall be staggered.
2.3 The following persons shall serve as ex-officio members of the committee.
2.3.1 The Associate Provost for Research

557

2.3.3 The Director of Research and Sponsored Programs
2.3.4 The Director of the Teaching Resource Center
3. Functions of the Faculty Professional Development Coordinating Committee
The Faculty Professional Development Coordinating Committee (FPDCC) shall coordinate all
faculty professional development activities, which fall within the following areas:
3.1 Recommend the distribution of campus faculty professional development funds
including Research, Scholarship and Creative Activities (RSCA) funds among the
categories of Mini-grants, Faculty Research Awards, and Summer Research
Fellowships.
3.2 Recommend funding needs for faculty professional development.
3.3 Explore and recommend additional sources of funding, both on and off
campus, for faculty professional development.
3.4 Request data from appropriate parties on all expenditures for faculty professional
development purposes. Such data shall be used to submit required campus reports to
the Chancellor's Office. The recommendations indicated above shall be made to the
Vice
President for Academic Affairs/Provost.
4. Procedures for Review of Professional Awards Programs
4.1 The procedures apply to award applications received after the date of formal
approval of this policy by the Faculty Senate.
4.2 Information pertaining to decisions for professional awards under programs
administered by the Faculty Professional Development Coordinating Committee shall be
summarized and maintained by the Office of Academic Research. For each project, the
summary information shall include type of award, college, title of proposal, author(s),
funding amount, and recommendation.
4.3 The summary data information listed in 4.2 shall be maintained within the Office of
Academic Research along with a final report by the award recipient(s) on the outcome of
the completed project and use of the funds awarded.
4.4 Final reports for funded proposals shall be submitted to the Office of Academic
Research. A copy of each final report shall be placed in the appropriate faculty
member(s)’ Working Personnel Action File.

558

4.5 For each funding cycle or award program, summary information shall be provided to
the college Professional Awards Committee (PAC) by the Office of Academic Research.
The information will be used to identify current submissions for professional awards by
faculty who have received one or more previous awards and who have failed to submit
final reports.
4.6 Those proposals associated with incomplete files from a prior funding cycle or award
program (i.e., proposals without final reports) shall be excluded from the proposals
submitted to the college PAC for review. The Office of Academic Research shall notify
authors of proposals without appropriate documentation that their submissions have
been disqualified on this basis.
4.7 The call for proposals for each award program shall stipulate that final reports for
previous awards are required in order for a proposal to be given consideration by the
college PAC.
4.8 On an annual basis, the Faculty Professional Development Coordinating Committee
shall review the completed files. The review will summarize in aggregate form the
characteristics of all proposals funded and completed. This information shall be used to
determine the effectiveness of the various award programs (i.e., whether each award
program is meeting its stated objectives). The information also may have implications for
eliminating underused award programs and for generating new categories of funding
support for professional growth. Finally, the ad hoc review shall provide information to be
used in annual and other reports on University faculty professional development
programs.
4.9 Exception for College-Level Professional Development Resources and SupportThe
provisions contained herein do not apply to professional development resources and
support provided by a college to its faculty from sources other than those provided by
the Chancellor’s Office. Colleges will develop their own criteria and procedures for
awarding such college-level support and reporting such awards to college faculty.
5. Reporting Requirements
5.1 The Office of Academic Research shall provide the Faculty Senate with an annual
report on the number of awards, the source of funds, the amount of funding in each
award category, and the distribution of awards by college.

559

FAM 856.3 POLICY AND PROCEDURES FOR REVIEWING A
PROGRAM FOR DISCONTINUANCE OR MERGER
FAM 856.3 Reviewing a Program for Discontinuance or Merger
Discontinuance of a bachelor’s, master’s, or doctoral degree program (or the merger of such a
program into another) must always be preceded by a thorough consideration of the role that the
program plays in the intellectual and academic purposes of the university. The decision to
discontinue an academic program can mean the permanent elimination of an instructional area
and must be made with the same care and thorough review accorded the creation of new
programs. This review may be initiated for a variety of reasons. Typically, programs are
discontinued when they no longer serve student or community needs to the extent necessary to
justify their expense. Occasionally, it will be desirable for a once-independent program to be
merged into another continuing program. In cases of financial exigency, a program may need to
be discontinued or merged because the University must devote the resources that would
otherwise support it to other pressing needs. The purpose of this policy is to describe the
standards and procedures for reviewing whether a bachelor’s, master’s, or doctoral degree
program should be discontinued or merged into another program where these actions are within
campus authority. No such program shall be discontinued or merged without consultation with
program faculty, the Faculty Senate, the Vice President for Academic Affairs/Provost, the
President, The Chancellor and all other groups or persons likely to be affected by the
discontinuance or merger, including enrolled students.
I. INITIATION OF A REVIEW FOR PROGRAM DISCONTINUANCE OR MERGER
(“PDM REVIEW”)
A. Who May Initiate a PDM Review
A request for the review of an academic program to consider whether a program should be
discontinued or merged into another one may be initiated:
1. By a petition signed by an absolute majority of tenure-track faculty in the program;
2. By a petition signed by an absolute majority of tenure-track faculty of the College in
which the program is located;
3. By the written recommendation of the Executive Committee of the Faculty Senate
(“Executive Committee”);
4. By the written recommendation of the Provost/Vice President for Academic Affairs
(“Provost”); or
5. By the written recommendation of the President of the University.
B. When a PDM Review May Be Conducted

560

1. A review for discontinuance or merger of a program shall normally take place during
the academic year (September through June).
2. In the event that the Provost and the Executive Committee concur that extraordinary
circumstances require a PDM Review to be conducted during the summer months, they
may do so, provided that the review follows the other guidelines of this policy.
C. Special Rules for PDM Review Petitions:
1. In the case of a petition by program faculty (under I.A.1), a copy of the petition shall
be filed with the Coordinator of the Program and (if different) the Chair of the
department/Director of the School in which the program is housed at least one week
before it is begun to be circulated.
2. In the case of a petition by College faculty (under I.A.2), a copy of the petition shall be
filed with the College Dean at least one week before it is begun to be circulated.
3. In the event that the Dean or other faculty member in the College in which a program
is housed believes that there were improprieties in the circulation of a petition, either
among program or College faculty, the Dean or other faculty member may request the
Executive Committee to review the circulation of the petition, and if the Executive
Committee determines that improprieties might have occurred, the Executive Committee
may require that the petition be recirculated before accepting it for further action.
D. Content and Filing of Petition or Recommendation to Initiate PDM Review A signed petition
or written recommendation to review a program for possible discontinuance or merger shall be
filed with the Office of the Faculty Senate. This petition or recommendation shall explain why a
program review is warranted in this case by addressing, with as much specificity as is
practicable, the relevant criteria stated in Section II below. When the petition or recommendation
is filed with the Faculty Senate, it shall include as much relevant documentation and supporting
information as practicable. In the case that financial exigency is being asserted, the petition or
recommendation shall include an explanation why this particular program was chosen for
discontinuance or merger, including comparative data for programs, both instructional and
administrative, being retained.
E. Notice of Initiation of PDM Review
The Faculty Senate Office shall distribute copies of the petition or recommendation to
review a program for discontinuance or merger (without attachments) to:
1. The Coordinator of the program and (if different) the Chair of the department/Director
of the School in which the program is housed, and in the case of proposed merger of the

561

program into a program housed in another department/school, the Chair of that other
department/Director of that other school;
2. The faculty teaching in the program;
3. The Dean of the College having supervisory responsibility over the program and, in
the case of merger of the program into a program in another College, the Dean of that
College;
4. The Provost;
5. The Chairs of the Executive Committee, the University Curriculum Committee, the
Educational Policy and Resources Committee, and the Faculty Affairs Committee of the
Faculty Senate;
6. The Vice President for University Advancement; and
7. The President of Associated Students, Inc. (“ASI”).
F. Appointment of PDM Review Committee:
The Executive Committee, after determining that a petition or recommendation has been
properly filed with the Faculty Senate, shall appoint a PDM Review Committee, comprising five
tenured full-time faculty members, including one each from the Executive Committee, the
Educational Policy and Resources Committee, the Faculty Affairs Committee, and the University
Curriculum Committee, provided that at least one of them shall be faculty in the College in which
the program is located and at least one of them shall be faculty in another College. The
Executive Committee shall not appoint to the PDM Review Committee any member of the
faculty of the program under review.
G. Compilation of Information for PDM Review:
1. The Faculty Senate Office shall maintain copies of the initial petition for review,
together with any attachments to it and other documents it receives relating to it.
2. The Provost’s Office shall provide the Faculty Senate Office with information relevant
to the review if not gathered in the initial petition or recommendation, including:
a. Information from the Office of Institutional Research on enrollment, courses,
and retention data, including FTES figures for the number of majors and minors,
as well as a list of service courses offered by the program and enrollment data
relevant to these courses.
b. A six-year compendium of budget allocations for the program.

562

c. A six-year list of yearly staffing levels in the program. For each year the
number of tenured, tenure-track, full-time lecturers, and part-time lecturers will be
traced.
d. An analysis whether the proposed discontinuance of the program could result
in the layoff of faculty employees, including part-time and full-time temporary
faculty. If the discontinuance could lead to the layoff of bargaining unit
employees, the analysis shall also include options, if any, that might be
implemented to avoid or mitigate possible layoffs.
e. An analysis of the effect that program discontinuance or merger might have on
external grant and contractual obligations.
f. Data that may be useful in comparing the program under review with other
programs at the University, using standard indicia of performance. The PDM
Review Committee may request additional comparative data during the course of
its deliberations.
3. The program under review shall provide the Faculty Senate Office a copy its most
recent program review and, if externally accredited, copies of its most recent
accreditation reports. It shall also provide copies of the course syllabi for courses taught
in the program during the last three quarters. The program faculty shall have an
opportunity to comment on data on student enrollments provided by the Office of
Institutional Research, and they may supply any other materials that they may consider
relevant to the review.
4. The Executive Committee and the Provost shall agree on a date by which the PDM
Committee shall submit its report. The date shall be chosen so that at least two weeks
(excluding holidays) immediately following it will fall within the regular academic year.
II. STANDARDS FOR PDM REVIEW
A. Review of Evidence and Data:
A review to determine whether to discontinue or merge a program must be based on an
assessment of the program that is supported by objectively based, verifiable evidence and data.
The PDM Review Committee shall review all of the information gathered under I.G. The
Committee shall also seek information and advice from all faculty members, both instructional
and non-instructional, who have been involved in the operation of the program within the last
two academic years. The Committee shall also arrange for consultation with groups or persons
likely to be affected by the discontinuance, including enrolled students.
B. Academic Considerations:

563

1. The review shall consider the extent to which the program makes an integral and
significant contribution to the university’s overall academic mission, offers a
degree/option that advances the programmatic needs of the department/school, college,
and university, and meets appropriate disciplinary standards.
2. The review shall consider whether the program offers a suitable array of required and
elective courses, which are scheduled and offered in a pattern that permits students to
complete the program within a reasonable time. The review should also consider the
ways in which curricular offerings support other programs (graduate and/or
undergraduate) on campus.
C. Budgetary Considerations:
1. The review should consider whether the program attracts enough students to warrant
the allocation of resources made to the program, taking into consideration the number of
students taught in General Education courses and other courses outside of the program
by program faculty and the fact that enrollments in some programs are subject to
substantial variations in enrollments. A short-term downturn in enrollments should not be
the basis for making a long-term decision about the program.
2. The review should consider whether the program has the faculty and other resources
needed to support the curriculum and provide an appropriate schedule of courses and
whether the expertise of the faculty members in the program is sufficient to support the
program.
3. The review should consider whether there are sufficient resources of all types to
support the program, including library resources, space, administrative support,
computer and other equipment, computer software, and equipment maintenance.
4. The review should consider, not only the nominal “costs” of continuing a program, but
the actual “savings” of discontinuing it.
5. The review should consider the effect that discontinuance of a program would have on
donors, grants, and external commitments, partnerships, and needs.
6. In cases where financial exigency is being asserted, the review should consider
whether the explanation offered why this particular program should be discontinued or
merged is convincing and what alternatives exist for necessary budgetary savings.
III. RESOLUTION OF REVIEW
A. Committee Report:

564

1. After review in accordance with the standards set out in Section II above and
deliberation thereon, the PDM Review Committee shall prepare a report recommending
that the University:
a. maintain the program in its current form;
b. maintain the program, contingent upon the program's meeting specified
conditions recommended to be completed within a specified time;
c. discontinue the program; or
d. merge the program into another program.
2. In cases where the Committee recommends against discontinuance despite an assertion of
financial exigency, the Committee shall explain why it was not convinced that this particular
program should be discontinued. The report may suggest alternative sources for budgetary
savings.
3. In the case that a minority of the Committee disagrees with the recommendation of the full
Committee, it may write a minority report that will be circulated with the full Committee report.
4. The program faculty shall be provided a copy of the Committee report and of the minority
report (if any) and shall have the right to prepare a response to the Committee report. If the
program faculty deliver such a response to the Faculty Senate Office within two weeks of its
originally receiving the Committee report, the program faculty’s response shall be circulated with
the full Committee report. If program faculty disagree on a single response to the report, they
may submit a majority report and a minority report, both of which shall be circulated with the
PDM Review Committee report, provided that they are delivered to the Faculty Senate Office
within the two-week period allotted for program faculty response.
B. Distribution of Report:
1. Copies of the report, including any minority report or program faculty response,the
initial petition or recommendation, and all appropriate documentation and other
information shall be forwarded to the Office of the Faculty Senate.
2. Copies of the report, including any minority report or program faculty response, shall
be forwarded to the Office of the Provost.
3. Copies of the report, including any minority report or program faculty response, shall
be distributed to the program faculty.

565

4. Where the PDM Review was initiated by petition of College Faculty, copies of the
report, including any minority report or program faculty response, shall be distributed to
the petitioners.
C. Consideration of Report:
1. In the event that the PDM Review Committee, the Executive Committee, and the
Provost concur that the program should be maintained in its present form, no further
action shall be taken. The Faculty Senate Office shall advise the person or persons who
originally petitioned for or recommended the PDM review of this disposition.
2. In all other cases, the PDM Review Committee report (and, if applicable, the minority
report or program faculty response) shall be reviewed by the Faculty Senate. All
attachments, documentation, and other information shall be made available to all
members of the Faculty Senate, whether online, for inspection at the Faculty Senate
Office, or otherwise, at least ten days prior to Senate deliberation on the report. The
Faculty Senate will forward its recommendations, along with the PDM Review
Committee report and all materials relating to it, to the Provost.
3. The Provost will forward his or her recommendation to the President.
4. If the President decides that program discontinuance or merger is warranted, the
President shall advise the Chancellor of the proposed discontinuance in accordance with
EP&R 79-10.
5. The Chancellor will review the proposal for systemwide effects, seeking the advice of
whatever groups the Chancellor deems appropriate. The Chancellor may request
additional information from the campus if needed for this review. The Chancellor will
provide comments to the President, informing the President of any system concerns so
that these may be considered in the final decision.
6. The President shall not take any administrative action leading to the de facto or official
discontinuance of an academic program before the Chancellor has commented on the
proposal.

FAM 856.6 ACADEMIC PROGRAM REVIEW
FAM 856.6 Academic Program Review

Purpose and Scope

566

The purposes of program review are to ensure the quality and currency of academic programs;
to assess student learning; and to inform institutional planning, budgeting and decision- making.
Reviewers evaluate program learning outcomes, student achievement of these outcomes, and
other aspects of program effectiveness, such as faculty areas of expertise, curriculum, and
resources.
Policy Statement
Every CSUSB degree-granting program, except for those that are reviewed and accredited by
external agencies, undertakes program review on a five-year cycle. (Externally-accredited
programs instead must submit all documentation from their external review and accreditation
process to the Office of Academic Programs.) The program review process includes the
following components involving multiple constituencies with specific roles and responsibilities:
1. Review of program learning outcomes (PLOs)
2. Collection and analysis of data on program effectiveness, including evidence of
student learning and feedback from students, faculty, staff, alumni and other relevant
stakeholders throughout the review cycle
3. Written self-study report from the program
4. External review consisting of a site visit and report by an external reviewer or
reviewing team
5. Internal review conducted by the College Dean, Dean of Graduate Studies (if
applicable), and University Academic Program Review Committee
6. Development of a Plan of Action by the program, in consultation with the College
Dean, in response to the findings and recommendations from the program faculty,
external reviewer, and internal reviewers. The Plan of Action is reviewed and approved
by the College Dean. This entire process is facilitated by the Vice Provost of Academic
Programs. The Assessment Office and the Committee on Learning and Academic
Student Success (CLASS) support academic programs' assessment capabilities and
assist faculty with program review.
Procedure and Process
A. Five-Year Cycle
Program review occurs through a five-year cycle of assessment. Expectations for major
activities in each year of the cycle are described in the following list and illustrated in the
figure below. These activities are consistent with WSCUC expectations for program
review.

567

• Year 1 - Planning and Assessing: Establish, revise, and/or reaffirm PLOs and
plan for assessing student learning vis-a-vis PLOs. In addition, decide on a
process for evaluating other aspects of program effectiveness, including faculty
specializations, curriculum, and program resources. During this planning phase,
consult the recommendations and Plan of Action from the previous program
review. Continue annual data collection and other assessment activities.
• Year 2 - Implementing and Assessing: Implement annual data collection and
other assessment activities set-up during the planning phase.
• Year 3 - Reporting and Assessing: Submit MID-CYCLE REPORT to Office of
Academic Programs. This report discusses the program's Year 1 and Year 2
implementation with analysis, interpretation, review, and recommended changes
based on Year 1 and 2 data and program actions. Continue annual data
collection and other assessment activities. See Appendix A. for expectations for
the Mid-Cycle Report.
• Year 4 -Assessing: Continue annual data collection and other assessment
activities.
• Year 5 - Reviewing and Assessing: Self-study, Internal Review and External
Review: Submit SELF-STUDY REPORT to Office of Academic Programs;
conduct external and internal review processes; complete PLAN of ACTION in
response to the self-study, and internal and external reviews. Continue annual
data collection and other assessment activities. See Appendix D for the Calendar
of Deadlines related to this year of review.

568

CSUSB ACADEMIC PROGRAM REVIEW
5-Year Cycle

B. Self-Study
The self-study report discusses strengths and weaknesses of the program based on annual
assessments of student learning and other evaluative processes; makes recommendations for
changes in the program curricular structure, courses, instruction, activities, and/or allocation
of resources; and provides an outlook for the program's near future. Each program will assign,
where possible, one of its own tenure-line faculty members who has been at the University for
at least two years to act as the program's self-study faculty representative. It is recommended
that the self-study representative be granted reassigned time for their work. Typically, the
reassigned time will be provided by the College. In addition, the self-study faculty representative
will receive support in their role from the Assessment Office and Office of Academic Programs.
Expectations for the self-study report are described in Appendix B.
C. External Review
External review is a crucial component of program review. Expert faculty peers from outside of
CSUSB are invited to review the program and evaluate the program's academic quality,
strengths, weaknesses, and potential future directions. The external reviewers may offer
recommendations on curriculum, pedagogy, assessment, resourcing, and other aspects of the
program.
Selection of Reviewers
External reviewers are selected from accredited universities outside of CSUSB and have
expertise relevant to the program under review. Preferably, external reviewers are not closely
569

affiliated with the program or program faculty. The program faculty will submit a ranked list of
three external reviewer candidates and their CVs or professional bios to the University
Academic Program Review Committee. This committee makes a recommendation of an
external reviewer to the Vice Provost of Academic Programs, who then issues a formal invitation
letter to the reviewer and coordinates any site visit logistics. An honorarium plus reimbursement
of travel expenses are provided to the external reviewer through Academic Affairs.
External Reviewer Site Visit
External reviewers, as recognized experts in the disciplinary/professional field of the program,
provide critical judgment, ensure the objectivity of the program review process, and evaluate the
program in relation to currency in the discipline/profession. Reviewers should evaluate the
curriculum, activities, and student learning in the program, considering such factors as the
resource allocations to the program, trends in the discipline, specializations of the faculty, and
characteristics of the students and the community that the program serves.
External reviewers do the following:
1. Receive and review the self-study and associated data before arriving on campus.
a. An orientation meeting with the Provost or designee, Vice Provost for
Academic Programs, Graduate Dean (if applicable), College Dean, and
Department Chair/School Director
b. An explanatory program presentation by program faculty, including the
Program Coordinator and the Program/Department Assessment Coordinator (if
applicable).
c. Discussion(s) between external reviewer and program faculty
d. Meeting(s) with students
e. Review of student artifacts
f. Follow-up discussions with faculty
g. Closure planning meeting among members of the external review team, if
applicable
h. Exit meeting with the Provost or designee, College Dean, Vice Provost for
Academic Programs, Graduate Dean (if applicable), and Department
Chair/School Director

570

3. Submit a written report to the College Dean within two weeks of the site visit.
Expectations for the External Reviewer Report are contained in Appendix C.
D. Internal Review
The internal review of the program is conducted by the University Academic Program Review
Committee, the College Dean, and, if applicable, Dean of Graduate Studies. These internal
review entities each provide a written report based on their reading of the self-study and
external review.
Particular questions that the internal reviewers may consider in writing their reports include the
following:
1. What areas of program strength and potential improvement have emerged in the selfstudy and external review?
2. To what extent have student learning and/or program effectiveness improved as a
result of actions by the program during this review cycle?
3. What constructive feedback can be provided to the program faculty that will assist
them in developing their next Plan of Action?
E. Plan of Action
The Office of the Vice Provost for Academic Programs schedules a meeting of program faculty,
Department Chair/School Director, College Dean, Chair of the University Academic Review
Committee, and the Provost or designee to discuss the findings of the program review and to
help develop the program's Plan of Action. The Plan of Action should be based on findings and
feedback from the self-study, external review, and internal review. The Plan will be completed
by the program faculty and submitted to the College Dean and to the Office of Academic
Programs.
Each item in the Plan of Action will address the following:
1. The expected action/change to be taken, e.g. revision of curriculum, addition of
faculty, integration of HIPs, purchase of equipment, etc.
2. A specific timeline for when relevant tasks will be completed.
3. Individuals responsible for carrying out the needed change.
4. Any anticipated cost for implementation of the recommendation.
5. Identification of resources that may be needed for implementing the action.

571

The Mid-Cycle Report has the following components. Please note that the Mid-Cycle Report is
not expected to be as comprehensive or as detailed as the Self-Study Report.
I. Response to Previous Program Review
• Description of what the program has accomplished to date on the Plan of Action and
what it will accomplish by the next program review
II. Students
• Discussion of any changes to the program's student population since the last program
review, including student demographics and student interests, and how the program has
addressed students' needs and interests relative to thosechanges.
Ill. Curriculum & Learning Environments
• Description of any changes that have been made to the program curriculum or other
learning experiences in the program including but not limited to high impact practices
(HIP) (e.g., service learning, internships, student research, etc.) since the last program
review
• Updated curriculum map if any changes were made
• Description of any changes to pedagogical approaches
• Description of any changes to instructional modality of the program's course offerings
(e.g., face-to-face, hybrid, fully online, synchronous; asynchronous)
IV. Student Learning & Success
• Summary of the annual assessment processes that the program has implemented
since the last program review, including the specific PLOs assessed, assessment data
collected, and process for analyzing these data
• Summary of key findings from these assessments and of any changes the program is
implementing in response to these findings.
NOTE: The content for the two points above can be copied and pasted from the
program's annual assessment reports if these reports address all sections in the college
annual assessment reporting template.
• ·Description of any changes to the program faculty since the last program review in
terms of the following, as applicable:
● recruitment and hiring of tenure-track faculty and full- and part-time lecturers
diversity of the faculty

572

●
●

faculty achievements, awards, and/or recognitions
faculty participation in professional development related to teaching, learning,
and/or assessment

VI. Student Support
• Description of any changes in the following student supports, as applicable:
●
●

academic and career advising programs and resources
tutoring and/or supplemental instruction

Appendix B. Expectations for the Self-Study Report
The Self-Study Report has the following components:
I. Program Overview
• Brief description of the context of the program. This may include program
history or other information explaining the program in relation to the discipline,
college, and/or department/school.
• Description of the curriculum of the program, including any co-curricular
experiences or high impact practices (HIPs); any substantial changes to the
curriculum since the previous program review should also be described.
• Brief overview of the assessment processes for student learning and program
effectiveness.
II. Response to Previous Program Review
• Summary of the recommendations from the last program review.
• Summary of the Plan of Action resulting from the last program review.
• Description of what the program has accomplished on that Plan of Action.
iii. Students
• Description of student enrollments, including current number of students in
each concentration and trends in student enrollment since the last program
review.
• Discussion of the program's student population, including student
demographics and student interests, and how the program is responsive to
diverse student backgrounds and interests.
IV. Learning Outcomes and Assessment Process
• Description of how the PLOs were developed and of any revisions to the PLOs
since the last program review.
• Presentation of a matrix mapping Program Learning Outcomes (PLO) to
Institutional Learning Outcomes (ILO) and, if applicable, to external professional

573

standards.
• Presentation of a curriculum map showing how PLOs are addressed in program
courses.
• Description of the program's annual student-learning assessment process,
including measures for evaluating student achievement on the PLOs, and types
of data collected each year using these assessment measures since the last
program review.

V. Program Effectiveness
• Presentation of key findings from the annual assessments of student learning
since the last program review.
• Summary analysis and interpretation of these key assessment findings in terms
of strengths and weaknesses of the program.
• Discussion of other aspects and measures of program effectiveness, including
but not limited to:
● Faculty areas of expertise
● Evidence of faculty achievement, productivity, and professional engagement
● Numbers of tenure-line and lecturer faculty teaching in each of the keyareas of
the program
● Staff contributions to the program
● Curricular innovation in the program
● Pedagogies and modalities in the program
● High-impact practices in the program
● Advising and mentoring available to students in the program
● Student, faculty, staff and alumni feedback on the program
● Alumni achievement
VI. Program Resources
Evaluative discussion of program resources, including but not limited to:
• Total numbers of tenure-line and lecturer faculty, as well as staff
• Professional development funding and opportunities for faculty and staff, in the
program
• Funding for program operations and activities
• Grants and other external sources of funding
• Space and equipment available for program operations and activities
VII. Summary and Recommendations
• Summary of strengths, areas of improvement and weaknesses of the program,
in light of the findings described in sections V. and VI.
• Recommendations for the program over the next five years.

574

Appendix C. Expectations for the External Reviewer Report
The external reviewer report should contain a summary of the reviewer's activities during the
site visit, and offer the reviewer's observations, insights, and feedback on program quality in the
following areas:
I. Learning Outcomes and Program Effectiveness
Program Learning Outcomes and Curriculum
a. How well do the program's PLOs represent a scope and depth of student
learning appropriate for the degree type/level?
b. How well are the PLOs aligned with CSUSB's ILOs?
c. To what extent does the program's curriculum exhibit the breadth and depth
commensurate with the expectations for student learning?
d. Is the program advancing the field(s) of study or state of the profession? Is the
program teaching the right content for the field(s)? Does it respond to the
profession's needs?
Evidence of Student Learning
a. How effective is the program's assessment plan for evaluating student learning
in the program?
b. Does the program collect, maintain, and use summative evidence of student
learning on a regular basis?
c. To what extent are students achieving the learning outcomes? What evidence
have you examined that indicates student learning? What do you see as avenues
for improvement of student learning?
d. To what extent has systematic evaluation of student work been used to
improve the program?
Stakeholder Views of Program Effectiveness
a. What do students and other stakeholders (e.g., faculty, staff, alumni, advisory
groups, professionals in the field; employers; etc.) view as the strengths of the
program?
b. What do they view as components of the program that could be improved?
II. Faculty Engagement
a. Do the program faculty have an appropriate distribution of academic expertise and
professional experience to deliver the degree program?

575

b. Does the program have an appropriate balance of tenure-line and lecturer faculty?
c. If applicable, to what extent does the program effectively integrate non-faculty
specialists (e.g. technologists, advisors, field coordinators, assessors, etc.) into the
professional team?
Ill. Program Resources
a. Has the program been adequately resourced relative to the size and scope of the
program or the stated mission and goals of the program?
b. Are the resources requested by the program appropriate to meet program goals?
c. Assess the effectiveness of program actions given the resources the program has had
available for executing its Plan of Action during this program review cycle.
d. If the program is under-enrolled, what would you suggest to recruit more students?
e. If the program is impacted (over-capacity), what would you suggest to address
the issue?
IV. Overall Comments and Recommendations
a. What overall comments do you have about strengths, areas of improvement, and
weaknesses of the program?
b. What recommendations do you have for the program over the next five year period?

Appendix D. Calendar of Deadlines for Academic Program Review

576

577

578

FAM 859.45
GUIDELINES FOR MINIMIZING RISKS FOR POTENTIALLY HAZARDOUS
STUDENT PROGRAMS AND ACTIVITIES
FAM 859.45 Guidelines for Minimizing Risks for Potentially Hazardous Student Programs and
Activities
Purpose
The purpose of this document is to provide background and general guidance for faculty
and staff in relation to potentially hazardous student activities. Such activities are not
limited to, but generally fall into six broad categories:
- Intramural sports
- Extramural sports
- Leisure recreation programs
- Field trips
- On-campus laboratories, instructional workshops and studios
- Physical Education courses and the Activities portion of the Extension Program such
as horseback riding
Summary tables of information applicable to each of these categories are on pages 8
through 10.

579

Safety
It is the practice at CSUSB to make every reasonable effort to provide safe equipment,
conditions, and supervision of all potentially hazardous student activities. Safety precautions
should be issued to participants by responsible persons in each potentially hazardous situation.
On a continuing basis, the campus Environmental Health and Safety Officer (Building
Coordinator) monitors campus facilities in order to recognize hazards to be eliminated.
Additionally, every member of the campus community is requested to report any potentially
hazardous condition to the appropriate administrator or the campus Environmental Health and
Safety Officer.
Review of Potentially Hazardous Student Activities: Prior to the conduct of an activity
that falls within the purview of this document, the university official designated in the
attached tables as "reviewing official," or his or her designated
representative, will insure, inter alia, that
- the appropriate waiver forms have been submitted
- transportation has been arranged pursuant to University procedures
- safety requirements have been met and insurance coverage for the
participants is adequate
- health and accident insurance for the participant is adequate
- the participants have been fully informed of all hazardous aspects of the
activity
Accident Reporting (for all categories of persons associated with CSUSB programs)
On Campus (normal working hours)
1. Report the accident to the faculty, staff, responsible persons concerned
or, in their absence, to the Dean of Students (ext. 7524).
2. In the event of serious injury, notify the Student Health Center (ext.7218).
3. File an accident report (form E) with the Student Health Center.
On Campus (other than normal working hours)
1. Report the accident to the faculty, staff, or responsible persons concerned.
2. In the event of serious injury, notify the Campus Police (ext. 7557). They will summon
medical assistance.
3. File an accident report (form E) with the Student Health Center within 48 Hours.

580

Off Campus
1. Report the accident to the faculty, staff, or responsible persons concerned.
2. In the event of serious injury, seek immediate medical assistance. Notify Campus Police by
collect telephone call (909) 880-5165, as soon as practical.
3. File an accident report (form E) with the Student Health Center within 48 hours; and if in a
traffic accident, file accident and injury reports with the California Highway Patrol.
Availability of Medical Care, Health and Accident Insurance
Other than individually purchased personal policies, such as the Supplemental Student Health
Plan available through the Student Health Center, the following medical care and insurance
coverages are in effect depending upon the type and place of campus sponsored activity:
Student Health Center: Services available to the campus community at no charge
during posted hours of operation. Service includes routine and emergency medical
treatment of the type normally performed in a Physician’s office. Additionally, ambulance
service to the San Bernardino Community Hospital can be provided if authorized by the
Health Center personnel, or after working hours if authorized by the Campus Police.
Emergency Room fee is included for matriculated students only. The Student Health
Center will also provide minimal emergency care to persons seriously injured on campus
but not associated with the university.
Student Travel Insurance: Accident insurance in the amount of $5,000 automatically
covers students enroute and during a university sponsored, scheduled, off-campus
event (Extramural sports are excepted). If a state or private vehicle is used for
transportation, it must be driven by a college employee for the insurance to be effective.
Air travel must be via an airline whose name appears on the Chancellor's approved list
(available in the Activities Office).
Trip Insurance: A mandatory $5,000 accidental death and injury policy must be
purchased by the Associated Students (AS) or a sponsoring club, organization, or
individual for students engaged in off-campus extramural sports or activities on a trip-bytrip basis, if they do NOT have evidence of a personal policy in that amount.
Worker's Compensation Insurance: Automatically applies to CSUSB employees while
performing their duties (student and graduate assistants are included).
Liability and Negligence
Except for "discretionary acts" (responsibility for basic policy decisions), public employees are
liable for injury caused by their act or omission in the same way as is a private person.

581

However, a public employee is privileged to request his or her public entity to defend him or her
against a claim or action for any injury arising out of an act or mission occurring within the scope
of his or her employment. Upon request, the public entity is also obliged to defend the action
brought against its employees. The state, however, will pay judgments against an individual, but
not pay punitive damages awarded. The only exceptions to this obligation arise in cases where
the public entity determines that the act or omission involved was not within the employee's
scope of employment, or that it was based upon actual fraud, corruption, or malice, or that the
providing of such defense would involve a conflict of interest.
Hazardous activities create special risks for both the college employee (s) who prepare and
conduct them and the institution which sponsors them. The potential risk of liability is
substantially greater in areas which involve hazardous activities than in normal academic
courses. Generally, liability to university employee (s) and the university will be decreased when
a written authorization for an activity of a hazardous nature is approved in advance by an
individual with authority to approve such activity. This simple practice can be of benefit to both
college employee (s) and the institution. It will largely remove any argument that the employee
is acting beyond the scope of his or her employment for purposes of receiving workers'
compensation pursuant to Labor Code Section 3600 in case of injury to the employee occurring
in the course of the activity or of receiving the benefits of defense by the Office of the Attorney
General and indemnification by the State under Government Code Sections 995 et seq. And
825 et seq. For any claims or causes of action which arise in the course of the activity. An
approval procedure can also serve to alert the employee to matters which should be addressed
in structuring an activity which will be as well planned and safe as possible. Employees
responsible for planning an activity of a potentially hazardous nature should fully advise
students that participation in any such activity is purely voluntary. If a student is required to take
a particular course involving an activity or field trip of a hazardous nature, that student should be
advised that participation in the activity or field trip is not a requirement for successful
completion of the course. Students should be further advised of the potential hazards which
may be encountered during the activity. This will enable students to make an informed choice as
to whether they want to participate in the activity.
Any significant liability which might result from directing potentially hazardous student
activities would in all probability be based upon the legal concept of "negligence." The
several elements which constitute negligent conduct are a duty of due care, a breach of
the duty by acting "unreasonably" and resulting injury or financial loss. Thus, in basic
terms negligence is explained as unreasonableness.
In all probability the due care required of a state university employee stems in some
way from the duty to properly supervise the conduct of the students and to prevent
these students from engaging in conduct which exposes them to unreasonable risks.
Any opinion concerning "negligent" conduct must be based upon an estimate of the
particular facts of each case. It is not possible prior to the occurrence of a specific
situation to accurately formulate guidelines for state college employees to assure that
they will avoid "negligent" conduct.

582

Required Forms
Because of the limited medical care that can be made available by the university, and
because some programs are strictly voluntary and involve non-student participants, the
university finds it necessary to limit its legal liability in certain instances. Since the
responsibilities of the university vary with regard to students and non-students, separate forms
for each classification are appended hereto. These forms are to be executed by each participant
in a potentially hazardous activity and maintained on file for one year.
Definitions
In order to clarify, as much as possible, the various circumstances in which potentially
hazardous activities might occur, the following definitions as used herein, are included for use
with the accompanying summary tables of potentially hazardous student activity.
AS - Associated Students of California State University, San Bernardino
Campus Community - CSUSB students, faculty, and staff. Includes summer session
and extension programs
Club Sport - Any group of individuals from CSUSB who have common recreational
and/or athletic interests who are chartered by the University. A club sport can be either
intramural or extramural. If the club is composed of or competes with persons other than
CSUSB students, faculty, and staff, it is extramural and subject to Education Code Sect.
32221.
Damages - Compensation in money imposed by law for loss or injury.
Education Code, Sect. 32221 - A regulation requiring the University to provide
accidental death and injury insurance of at least $5,000 for extramural student athletic
competition participants, providing the participants do not have a person policy in that
amount. AS pays the premium. Non-students must provide evidence of their own
comparable insurance.
Employee - A volunteer or a person on the CSUSB payroll. Includes student and
graduate assistants while on an hourly pay status.
Extramural - On or off campus competitive athletic groups or classes involving a person
or persons other than CSUSB students, faculty, and staff.
Field Trip - An off-campus trip recommended or required of students as a regularly
scheduled part of course work or assignments.

583

Health Center Services - Generally equivalent to the care a private physician can
provide in his office during normal working hours.
Intramural - On campus competitive athletic groups involving only CSUSB students,
faculty, and staff.
Liable - Responsible - subject to appropriation or attachment.
Leisure Recreational Programs - On and off campus scheduled non-credit activities
sponsored by the University solely for recreational purposes, such as the "Escape"
program or a non-credit recreational class in welding.
Matriculated Student - A person who has filed an application, paid the application fee,
been admitted, and is enrolled at CSUSB.
Negligence - Conduct which involves an unreasonably great risk of causing injury or
financial loss.
Students - Individuals currently enrolled at CSUSB in full, part-time, summer session,
or continuing education programs.
Student Travel Insurance - A group accident policy automatically insuring CSUSB
students up to a principal sum of $5,000 while being transported by a college or
authorized representative of the college to or from a college address or other place of
instruction to the place of a school sponsored activity, and while participating in college
sponsored (scheduled) activities that are conducted away from campus. Extramural
sports are excluded.
Supplemental Student Health Plan - An optional reimbursement insurance plan
available to CSUSB students at a nominal fee.
Tort - A wrongful act for which a civil action will lie, except one involving a breach
of contract.
Trip Insurance - A mandatory $5,000 accidental death and injury policy purchased by
the AS or a sponsoring club, organization, or individual on a trip- by-trip basis to satisfy
the requirements of the Education Code, Sect. 32221.
Tables of Potentially Hazardous Student Activities
The following data are presented in tabular form, by category of activity, as a ready reference
for college employees involved in the direction and supervision of potentially hazardous student
activities.

584

The attached forms are effective and should be used as directed herein.
Forms:
A - Notice of Agreement and
Understanding

Completed By:
(students)

B - Notice of Agreement and
Understanding And Waiver of

(Non-students)

All Claims
C - Field Trip Request Form

(Instructor File)

D - Authorization to Consent to
Medical Treatment

(Minor Students)

E - Accident Report

(All)

FAM 863 ADMINISTRATION OF SPONSORED PROGRAMS
ACTIVITIES
FAM 863 Administration of Sponsored Programs
1. Sponsored program activity is defined as research, public service, and educationally related
grant or contract projects, whether solicited or unsolicited, which are either submitted to or
received from federal, state, municipal, or county agencies; public or private corporations; and
private foundations or individuals. When such proposals or awards provide funding
administered by the university or its auxiliaries, use of University name, facilities, or personnel,
or endorsement by the University, approval as herein described is required.
2. The governing state and federal laws, agency regulations and CSU executive orders require
careful review and approval of sponsored program activity. Thus, all project proposals and
awards must be reviewed and approved in the manner set forth below. Only after review and
approval, will a proposal be submitted, or an award accepted in the name of the University
or its auxiliaries.
3. The Director of Research and Sponsored Programs shall administer the grant and contract
approval process.
4. Preparation of Grant and Contract Proposals
a. Prior to the preparation of a grant or contract proposal, prospective project
directors/principal investigators should consult with, or advise their department
chairs/school directors or immediate supervisor about the proposal and any impact it

585

may have on the department/school or area. If necessary, chairs/directors or supervisors
should in turn consult with the college deans or equivalent administrator.
b. Prior to the preparation of a grant or contract proposal, prospective project
directors/principal investigators should discuss possible budget or cost-sharing
considerations with department chairs/school directors or equivalent unit and if
necessary with the college dean or appropriate administrator.
c. Either the grant and contract proposals, or companion internal review documentation
should specify, where appropriate, the following:
(1) The amount of reimbursed time for faculty members at their current rank and
step plus benefits. (See: Policy and Procedures for the Reimbursement of
Faculty Release Time).
(2) The amount of additional employment for faculty. (See: Guidelines and
Procedures on University-Compensated Faculty Additional Employment).
5. Submission and Approval of Grants and Contracts
a. Grant and contract proposals must be reviewed by the project
director's/principal investigator's department chair/school director or
organizational unit director, as appropriate. Reviewers shall assess the
following:
(1) Compatibility with the department's/school’s staffing requirements.
(2) Compatibility with departmental/school programs.
(3) Acceptability of departmental/school support commitments.
b. Grant and contract proposals shall have appropriate college dean or
comparable organizational unit review and recommendation based upon
compatibility with existing and/or anticipated college interests and activities.
c. College deans or other divisional unit administrators shall forward all grant and
contract proposals to the Sponsored Programs Office for review and
recommendation to the Vice President for Academic Affairs/Provost or
appropriate divisional vice presidents for final area approval.
d. Finally, all grant and contract proposals shall be approved by the Vice
President for Administration and Finance or by the Executive Director of
the Foundation, as appropriate.
e. It shall be the responsibility of the Sponsored Programs Office to ensure
that appropriate project clearances are obtained from other organizational units
which might be affected by either the submission of a proposal or the acceptance
of an award. Such clearances shall be obtained prior to final submission of a
proposal.

586

6. Administration of Grants and Contracts
Upon the award and acceptance of a grant or contract, the Project Director/Principal
Investigator in close coordination with the Foundation Office and the appropriate College Dean's
office or comparable organizational unit, assumes the responsibility of administering the project.
Specific responsibilities are:
(1) Project Director/Principal Investigator Responsibilities. The project director/principal
investigator has the primary responsibility to ensure appropriate management of the
project and accomplishment of programmatic objectives. Specific responsibilities
include:
(a) Overall responsibility to ensure that either the research or programmatic
commitments are accomplished.
(b) Authorizing all expenditures and maintaining appropriate expenditure
controls.
(c) Maintaining up-to-date records of financial obligations and expenditures.
(d) Reporting financial activity to the Foundation on a timely basis.
(e) Monitoring Foundation reports for accuracy and informing them when
discrepancies occur.
(f) Ensuring proper supervision of project employees.
(2) Foundation. The Foundation for CSUSB is legally and financially responsible for
compliance with, and fulfillment of all contracts it enters into on behalf of CSUSB. It is
obligated to operate within the rules and regulations of the CSU Board of Trustees and
the CSU Chancellor's Office. It must also be in compliance with all governing federal and
state laws. As the formal recipient of university grants and contracts, the Foundation has
primary responsibility to provide overall fiscal management, and it is obligated to ensure
that all institutional parties to the project are in full compliance with foundation,
university, and governmental policies and regulations. Specific responsibilities include:
(a) Acting as management liaison between the project director/principal
investigator and the contracting agencies to ensure that the research or project is
fully funded and can proceed.
(b) Informing project directors/principal investigators of all pertinent ruling policies
and regulations governing the foundation and the university, as well as the
individual contracts, and ensuring compliance with them.

587

(c) Assisting with budget implementation, contract interpretation, and providing
follow-up in resolving discrepancies.
(d) Providing human resources personnel and payroll functions and serving as
employer of record for all grant and contract employees.
(e) Providing purchasing support and advice on obtaining equipment, supplies
and services.
(f) Maintaining records of equipment purchased with grants or contract funds.
(g) Monitoring account expenditures and providing assistance in maintaining
budget controls.
(h) Filing required fiscal reports on a timely basis with state, federal, and other
agencies; monitoring the project director's filing of technical reports required by
the granting agency.
(3) College Dean/Divisional Administrator. The appropriate college dean or equivalent
divisional unit administrator is responsible for supporting and ensuring program and
personnel commitments within a reviewed and approved sponsored program. Specific
responsibilities include:
(a) Ensuring that the project director/principal investigator has institutional
support and resources appropriate to the commitments made by the university in
accepting the grant or contract award.
(b) Ensuring that the Project Director/Principal Investigator delivers the product or
services specified in the grant or contract.
(c) Exercising administrative oversight to ensure that university policies regarding
grants and contracts are followed.
(d) With the cooperation of the project director/principal investigator and the
Foundation Office, maintaining oversight of workload and assigned time
commitments of project faculty/principal investigator, ensuring the effective
transfer of funds for release reimbursement, and ensuring compliance with
university personnel policies.
(e) Reviewing and authorizing all direct reimbursements and travel expenditures
to the project directors/principal investigators to ensure compliance with
appropriate regulations.
(f) Monitoring foundation reports for accuracy and informing them when

588

discrepancies occur.

FAM 871.4
TEACHING RESOURCE CENTER
FAM 871.4 - Teaching Resource Center

Purpose and Scope
The purpose of the Teaching Resource Center (TRC) is to establish a formal structure to
promote and support innovation in undergraduate and graduate classroom instruction by
providing faculty with professional development opportunities in the area of curriculum,
pedagogy, and scholarship of teaching and learning. The goals shall include the following:
1. To serve as a center where faculty can seek assistance in the development of
effective teaching styles and strategies.
2. To serve as the central focus for all training of faculty in the use of technology and
other pedagogical techniques for classroom instruction.
To serve, in collaboration with relevant offices and committees in the university
such as Academic Technology and Innovation, Assessment for Academic Affairs,
and Teaching Academy, as a center for faculty to acquire knowledge and skills in
such areas as multiculturalism, internationalization of the curriculum,
cooperative learning, and assessment.
Policy Statement
Instructional faculty are encouraged to seek opportunities to implement effective pedagogical
approaches to improve student learning. This policy explains the role of the TRC in these
endeavors.
Activities of the TRC
The activities of the Teaching Resource Center shall include the following:
1. Arrange and coordinate seminars, workshops, lectures and discussion groups which
are designed to enhance faculty knowledge and skills in all areas of classroom
instruction.
2. Develop and coordinate a structured training program for faculty members in the use
of technology in the classroom. Specifically, training designed to carry out distance
learning instruction, to develop multimedia materials, and to familiarize the faculty with
the electronic classroom.

589

3. Arrange and coordinate efforts to provide mentoring to faculty in the improvement of
classroom instructional performance.
4. Collect and distribute resource materials on teaching improvement and innovations.
5. Establish and coordinate the activities of a teaching academy or its equivalent, as
approved by the Instructional Quality Committee, to help promote campus involvement
in teaching-related initiatives, and to enhance liaison between TRC and colleges.
Organizational Structure
The activities of the TRC shall be directed by a tenure-line (probationary or tenured) faculty
member appointed by the Provost and Vice President for Academic Affairs following appropriate
consultation with the Executive Committee of the Faculty Senate. The Director shall report to
the Associate Provost for Faculty Affairs and Development.

FAM 871.75 TEACHING ACADEMY
FAM 871.75 - Teaching Academy.pdf

Purpose and Scope
The purpose of the Teaching Academy (TA) is to foster conversation and inquiry on teaching
and pedagogical philosophy, create a safe environment for faculty to learn to become better
teachers, provide leadership in the initiation and implementation of TA activities, and act as an
ad hoc advisory board on issues related to teaching, as requested.
Policy Statement
In collaboration with the Teaching Resource Center (TRC), the Teaching Academy (TA) will
support teaching and learning at all levels and in all contexts of university activity, and will serve
as a focal point for the university's commitment to this end. In pursuing this goal, the Academy
will enhance the intellectual climate, promote discourse among all members of the University
community, and serve as an advocate for learning and teaching initiatives and innovations.
Teaching Academy Representation
1. Cabinet Membership

590

a. There will be 11 cabinet members in the Teaching Academy Cabinet in any given year
elected from membership of the TA. Preference will be given to active members of the
TA.
b. Each College and the library will have one elected member (either tenured or tenuretrack faculty).
c. Five additional at-large members shall be appointed by the Senate in consultation with
the Teaching Academy Cabinet; these shall be selected from among all teaching faculty
and librarians who apply.
d. The TRC Director will be an ex-officio member of the Teaching Academy Cabinet.
2. Nominations, Elections, and Appointments
Elections, nominations, and appointments for the following Fall semester shall take
place during the Spring semester of each year. Members of the cabinet will serve for 3 years
with no semester limits. At the end of the 3-year semester, the member can be re-elected or
appointed to the Teaching Academy Cabinet for another 3-year semester, as described above.
The rotation for the cabinet members will be as follows:
a. Year 1: Arts and Letters, Natural Sciences, and one at-large
b. Year 2: Library, Social and Behavioral Sciences, and two at-large
c. Year 3: Jack H. Brown CBPA, Education, and two at-large
3. General Membership
Although Teaching Academy events are open to all faculty in the university, its
membership extends only to those who actively participate in a substantial number of
the Teaching Academy and Teaching Resource Center activities.
Governance Structure and Functions of the Cabinet
A Vice-Chair will be elected by the Teaching Academy Cabinet in the Spring semester of each
year and will be the note taker for one year. The Vice-Chair will automatically be the Chair of
the Teaching Academy Cabinet in the subsequent year and will serve one year in that position,
thus providing for consistent leadership for the cabinet.
Funding
The Teaching Academy activities are supported by the TRC and Faculty Affairs and
Development. Additional funds may be solicited from external sources.
Annual Reports
The chair of the Teaching Academy and the TRC Director will submit to the Senate a joint report

591

on the Teaching Academy activities and plans at the end of each academic year.
Approvals
Approved by the Faculty Senate on 5/5/2020
Signed by the President on 06/23/2020
History
First created: 2016 by FAC
Q2S-Updated: 2020 by FAC
871.75;2020
Teaching Academy
FOR OFFICE USE ONLY
Signed and dated by
5/27/2020
Beth A. Steffel (Senate Chair} Date
Tomas Morales (President} Date

FAM 873.1
CREDIT FOR PRIOR LEARNING ACQUIRED THROUGH EXPERIENCE
FAM 873.1 Credit for Prior learning
Table of Contents
Purpose and Scope 1
Definitions 1
Policy Statement 3
Procedure and Process 4
Approvals 5
History 5
Purpose and Scope
This policy provides campus-wide guidelines for the recognition of prior learning experiences
for credit at California State University, San Bernardino (CSUSB), in compliance with EO 1036.
The policy, in alignment with EO 1036, promotes access for fair and equitable recognition of
prior learning, helps support student retention and persistence, reduces time to graduation and
assures quality and equity across various academic experiences.
This policy applies to CSUSB students seeking credit for demonstrated learning, knowledge, or
skills acquired through experience through the evaluation procedures described in this policy.
The Office of the Registrar and the Office of Admissions and Student Recruitment have
separate

592

policies for awarding credit for prior learning that can be accessed using the links below.
CSUSB Policy on Credit for Standardized Testing:
https://www.csusb.edu/registrar/articulation/test-credit
CSUSB Policy on Credit for Military Service: https://www.csusb.edu/admissions/applycsusb/military-veterans
2
Definition
Credit for prior learning acquired through experience refers to a process by which the
University evaluates a student’s non-traditional learning experiences, such as work experience,
volunteer experience, certifications, personal experiences, or self-directed learning, and grants
academic credit towards a degree or credential. This recognition of prior learning allows
students to accelerate their academic progress, save time, and reduce the cost of their
education by demonstrating that they have already acquired the knowledge, skills, and
competencies equivalent to those taught in specific courses. Some examples of student
experiences that can be applied to credit for prior learning according to the policy and
procedures herein include:
● Work experience: A student may be able to receive credit for relevant work experience
in a field related to the content of the course for which the student is requesting credit.
This may include work done in a paid job or volunteer work. Departments and programs
may use this policy to award credit for apprenticeships or internships if the relevant
work experience is complete at the time the request for credit is evaluated.
Departments and programs may use this policy to award credit for work experience
related to military service if the student has not already received credit for that
experience through another CSUSB policy or procedure.
● Certifications and licenses: A student may be able to receive credit if they hold relevant
certifications or licenses related to the content of the course for which the student is
requesting credit. For example, a student requesting credit for a computer science
course may receive credit for holding specialized certifications or licenses relevant to
computer science.
● Professional development: A student may be able to receive credit for attending
workshops, conferences, or other professional development opportunities related to
the content of the course for which the student is requesting credit. For example, a
student requesting credit for an education course may receive credit for completing
professional conference presentations or completing a professional development
workshop on classroom management.
● Personal experiences: A student may be able to receive credit if they can demonstrate
that they have gained relevant knowledge or skills through personal experiences that
are related to the content of the course for which the student is requesting credit. For
example, a student who has traveled extensively and learned a language may be able to
receive credit for language courses.

593

3
● Autodidacts: A student may be able to receive credit if they are a self-directed learner,
or autodidact, who has gained knowledge and skills through independent study or selflearning related to the content of the course for which the student is requesting credit.
For example, a student requesting credit for a business course may receive credit for
their self-taught entrepreneurial skills demonstrated through a portfolio of successful
business ventures or consulting projects.
Policy Statement
1. CSUSB recognizes the value of prior learning experiences and encourages students to
pursue credit for prior learning acquired through life experience in compliance with EO
1036.
2. Conditions of award of credit for prior learning according to this policy:
a. The student seeking credit for experiential learning shall be matriculated as a
student completing a degree at the CSUSB campus awarding credit.
b. The assessment of experiential learning shall be appropriate to the degree
objectives and/or general education requirements for the student seeking credit for
prior learning based on life experience.
c. Academic credit for such experiential learning shall be awarded only when it is
academically creditable and verifiable through a prior learning assessment
methodology.
d. Before academic credit earned for experiential learning becomes a part of the
student’s academic record, the student shall complete 15 units at CSUSB to establish
evidence of a satisfactory learning pattern. Graduate students shall complete three
units in residence before academic credit can be earned for experiential learning.
3. Credit for prior learning may be awarded in the form of course credit.
4. Credit for prior learning will be awarded based on a demonstration of college-level
learning and alignment with CSUSB course objectives.
5. Credit for prior learning will be evaluated by the appropriate academic department.
6. Students may not receive credit for prior learning for courses in which they have already
earned a grade of “C-” or higher.
7. Credit for prior learning, rewarded through this policy and/or any other policy or
procedure, may not exceed 25% of the units for the degree.
8. For those programs that are externally accredited, departments should contact their
accrediting agencies to ascertain if they allow credit for demonstrated learning,
knowledge, or skills acquired through experience. If their accrediting agency does not
allow such credit, departments should communicate this information to the student.
4
9. Department faculty are responsible for evaluating the appropriateness of student

594

requests for credit for prior learning for life experience. No instructor or department is
obligated to offer credit for prior learning based on prior life experience in accordance
with this policy.
Procedure and Process
10. Students interested in seeking credit for prior learning through demonstrated learning,
knowledge, or skills acquired through experience must first meet with the department
chair and instructor for the course for which they are seeking credit to determine if their
prior learning experiences align with CSUSB course objectives and degree requirements.
The department chair and instructor for the course for which the student is seeking
credit, in consultation with the Registrar’s office, shall determine if the student is
eligible for credit for prior learning, including consideration of the 25% eligibility limit
according to this policy.
11. Students must then submit a prior learning portfolio or other appropriate
documentation for evaluation by the appropriate academic department. The portfolio
should include a detailed description of the student’s prior learning experiences, how it
aligns with the course objectives, and evidence of the college-level learning achieved.
12. When appropriate, departments should codify in writing the procedures used by the
department to assist students in applying for credit for prior learning for life experience
and evaluating those requests for eligibility in order to ensure the policy is implemented
consistently. Department procedures must be aligned with this policy, including the
procedural steps described above (sections 10 and 11).
13. The evaluation process may include an interview, exam, or other assessment to
determine the student’s level of learning. Departments have the discretion to choose
the appropriate assessment methodologies for experiential learning course credit.
These may include, but are not limited to, written examinations, portfolios, personal
interviews, demonstrations and/or other means of assessment. Faculty and/or subject
matter experts may create and evaluate assessments in accordance with department
academic standards for credit for experiential learning. In some cases, as deemed
appropriate by the department, supporting documentation may be obtained from a
field supervisor and/or employer. Departments should also document and keep records
of the evaluation procedures that are used in individual cases of credit for prior learning
sought by students in the department.
14. CSUSB’s policy on academic dishonesty (FAM 803.5) applies to the policy and
procedures herein.
15. The academic department will make a recommendation for credit to the Office of the
Registrar in compliance with EO 1036.
16. The Office of the Registrar will record the credit on the student's transcript and apply it
towards the student's degree requirements.
17. Credit for prior learning will be recorded on the student's transcript and applied towards the
student's degree requirements. The student's academic record shall identify the specific course

595

or category of degree requirement for which the student has received credit for demonstrated
learning, knowledge, or skills acquired through experience.

FAM 872.2
POLICY ON SALE OF SELF-AUTHORED COURSE MATERIALS
FAM 872.2 Sale of Self-Authored Course Materials.pdf

Purpose and Scope
The purpose of this policy is to regulate the use of course materials authored by the instructor
so as to avoid conflict of interest---either real or perceived.
Policy Statement
Faculty may not receive any monies directly or indirectly from the sale of course materials to
California State University, San Bernardino classes that they teach or coordinate (i.e. any class
for which they have the authority to select or to participate in selecting instructional materials).
Faculty who unavoidably receive any monies and who then tum over the monies to their
department, their college, the university or any recognized charitable organization will not be in
violation of this policy.
Any assigned instructional materials for which students are charged must be made available
through the Coyote Bookstore or Printing Services and may also be made available through any
other vendor who wishes to provide the materials. Faculty members may not sell course
materials directly to their students.

596

